Awesome Ones’ Assembly (Palchen Düpa), the Heart Practice of the Awareness-Holders
from the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse

Vidyādhara tuṭaḥ mahā śrī pastritaḥ
Homage to the Heruka Awesome One! In future times, during the final five hundred years, gyadré
and elemental spirits will suddenly gather at the borders, and samaya-corrupting spirits
will assemble in the central regions.1 They will enter the hearts of practitioners and incite
them to negative actions. They will enter the hearts of ordinary people and increase
their negative habits. Beings will dream of monks, birds and monkeys. They will become anxious
and their heart’s wind-energy will become agitated.
In those future times it will not be possible to subdue such obstacles by ordinary methods.
The means to remove them will be the powerful deities who appear outwardly as bodhisattvas,
inwardly as awareness-holders,2 and secretly as the blazing and ferocious wrathful deities.
All the bliss-gone ones are included within the eight sādhana classes, which in turn are
all included in this practice of the Awesome Ones’ Assembly; there is no doubt that they
will subdue misleading guides! Keep this practice extremely secret, practice it by yourself,
and for the benefit of beings and the teachings, arouse courage! Samaya!
First, go to an isolated and joyful place that has been blessed by the presence of accomplished
adepts;3 in particular, a charnel ground or wilderness. Draw a ten-spoked maṇḍala complete
with doors and all the authentic characteristics. Upon that, place the accomplishment
substances, such as a skull, a representation of the enlightened body, a mantra manual, and
a ritual dagger4 made of sandal or acacia wood. If you wish to practice in an elaborate
manner, follow the accomplishment text.5 Otherwise, simply rely on the main dagger. Properly
arrange the regular offerings, the ambrosia,6 torma, rakta, and the ornaments of the maṇḍala.
Then, relax on a comfortable seat. It is vital to set the boundary, be undistracted
and refrain from slouching.
1. Taking Refuge
hum, deshek yongdzok könchok sum gyi ngang
Hūṃ. All the bliss-gone ones, who have the nature of the Three Jewels,
palchen düpé ngowor yong sharwa
Arise as the essence of the Awesome Ones’ Assembly.
trodü jepo changchub sem kyi lhar
Knowing that the bodhicitta deities who perform radiating and gathering
rang ngo shepé ngang né kyab su chi
Are my own true nature, I take refuge!
Three times.
2. Generating the Mind Set Upon Awakening7
hum, chö kyi ying la chokri nyam dal yang
Hūṃ. The basic space of the expanse of phenomena is equanimous and free of bias.
ma tok trulpar khyampé dakdzin dü
Yet lacking realization, one wanders in confusion. To liberate this demon of self-grasping
ösal chökü long du dralwé chir
Into the expanse of luminous dharmakāya
palchen lhatsok drubpar semkyé do
I practise the Awesome Deities and generate the mind set upon awakening!
Three times.
3. Gathering the Accumulations
ho, dorjé lobpön sangye pal
Hoḥ. I prostrate to the vajra master,8
dü sum shyuk la chaktsal lo
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!
chok sum tenpé shying gyur la
With a mind free from all duality,
nyimé yi kyi kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!
ngöjor yi kyi namtrulpé
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
dakpé chöpa shyé su sol
Both actual and envisioned.
ngödrub chuwo chöpé gek
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of accomplishments,9
nyejé malü shakpar gyi
I confess without exception.
chok chu khor sum dakpé chö
In all those actions throughout the ten directions done without attachment
ma chak chö la jéyirang
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!
dakpé ta shyi drima mé
I awaken the perfect mind set upon awakening,
dzokpé changchub semkyé do
Pure and untainted by the four extremes.
deshek wangchuk semchen la
To the bliss-gone ones,10 mighty lords and sentient beings.11
göpa sum chir lü bul lo
I offer my body for the threefold purpose.12
tserab drangpé lé nam kün
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
dü té changchub chenpor ngo
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
4. Giving the Torma to the Obstructing Forces
hum, nga ni chi palchenpo té
Hūṃ. I am the universal Awesome One—
changchub drub la barchöpé
All you harm-doers, misleading guides and elemental spirits
nöjé lokdren jungpo nam
Who obstruct the attainment of enlightenment:
torma long la chir deng shik
Take this torma offering and go elsewhere!
gal té ka lé dajénam
If you dare disobey this command,
gowo tsalpa gyar ké shing
Your head will be split into fragments
lü ni dultren shyindu shik
And your body ground to dust!
Strike them with wrathful mantras, heaps of fire and enchanted substances.
om benza maha krodha pema krodhi shori benza kili kilaya maha yaksha kala rupa karma ram ram
dzola ram hung pé
oṃ vajra-mahā-krodha padma-krodhīśvari vajra-kīli kīlaya mahāyakṣa kālarūpa karma raṃ raṃ jvala
raṃ hūṃ phaṭ
5. Establishing the Boundary and Protection Circle
hum, daknyi shyedang dorjé yi
Hūṃ. I am Vajra Wrath.
chen mik nyidar bar shying sek
My sun and moon eyes burn and blaze.
tuk lé trowö tsatsa tro
My heart emits wrathful deities like sparks.
tongsum trulpé mé yi geng
The billionfold universe is filled with emanating fire,
choktsam tsöncha cholwé tam
And all directions are filled with a frenzy of weapons.
dakmé tongpar tsam ché do
Within selflessness and emptiness, I set the boundary!
om surya tsenda benza krota dzola ram ram tsakrawatti maha krota sarva dushtam a hum pé
oṃ sūrya-candra13 vajra-krodha jvala raṃ raṃ cakravarti mahā-krodha sarva-duṣṭān e hūṃ phaṭ
6. Opening the Symbolic Door, Paying Homage, Confessing Mistakes and Taking the Vow
hum, marik ling tok yeshe turmé yé
Hūṃ. The cataract of ignorance is removed with the scalpel of primordial wisdom.
semnyi lha kur tokpé da chaktsal
I prostrate symbolically by realizing the nature of mind to be the form of the deity.
galtrul nongpa chökü long du shak
I confess transgressions, confusion and faults into the expanse of the dharmakāya.
palchen sok gi chir yang mi tong ngo
Even at the cost of my life, I will not abandon the Awesome One.
a la la ho
a la la hoḥ
7. The Descent of Blessings on the World and Beings
hum, palchen düpé lhatsok nam
Hūṃ. Deities of the Awesome Ones’ Assembly:
chökü long né tukjé kyé
From the expanse of the dharmakāya, arouse compassion,
longkü namrol chiryang gyur
And manifest in various saṃbhogakāya displays
tulkü kyilkhor tenpar ché
And nirmāṇakāya maṇḍalas and deities.
wangkur jin pob tak tsen tön
Grant empowerment and blessings, and show us signs and omens!14
om rulu rulu hung jo hung pé
oṁ rulu rulu hūṁ bhyo hūṁ phaṭ
sarva samaya abeshaya pem pem
sarva-samaya āveśāya pheṃ pheṃ
8. Blessing the Offerings
hum, ying né yeshe dru sum char du bab
Hūṃ. From basic space the three wisdom syllables descend like rain,
chödzé nyekyön ma dak sek tor trü
Burning, scattering, and washing away any faults and impurities in the offering substances.
droom lé rinchen a lé bhendé nang
From bhrūṃ arises a jewelled vessel and from a arises a skull-cup
chi nang sang sum chötrin gyatsor gyur
That contains oceans of outer, inner, and secret offering clouds.
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé dipam ghandhé rupa shapta ghandhé rasa saparshé sarva putsa
ah hum
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe dīpaṃ gandhe rūpa śabda gandhe rāsa sparśa sarva-pūja āḥ
hūṃ
Do the blessing with the ambrosia, torma, and rakta mantra.
om ah hung sarva pentsa amrita hung hrih ta
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva-pañcāmṛta hūṃ hrīḥ thaḥ
om ah hung maha balingta tedzo balingta bala bati guhya samaye soha
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā balimta teja balidha bhalabhati guhya-samaya svāhā
om ah hung maha rakta samanta mandala hung pé
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā-rakta samanta-maṇḍala hūṃ phaṭ
9. The Very Elaborate Generation Phase that Purifies Egg-Birth
hum, rangjung rigpa dakmé deshyin nyi
Hūṃ. Naturally-arisen awareness, suchness devoid of self—
roltsal kün nang nyingjé chenpö dang
Its display is all-illuminating, great compassion, whose radiance is
gyu yi rigpa hung gi nöchü jang
The causal awareness—hūṃ. It purifies the world and beings
denyi negyur dorjé tsé ngapa
And then transforms into a five-pronged vajra.
kechik yong gyur gyu yi heruka
Instantly, it converts into the causal heruka,
jömé long nga yum gyi kha la shar
Who arises in the sky of the mother—the inexpressible five expanses.
tuk lé é yam ra sum kem ram ché
From his heart unfold15 e, yaṃ, ra, suṃ, keṃ and raṃ.
é lé namkha yam lé yo jé lung
From e comes space, from yaṃ the whirling wind.
ra lé rakta sum lé shying chen shyi
From ra comes rakta, from suṃ the ground of human skin.
kem lé rüpé riwang bang rimchen
From keṃ a terraced mountain of bones.
ram lé kalmé rab bar ngamji long
From raṃ the magnificent expanse of blazing apocalyptic fire.
hung lé namchak dorjé drak chen teng
From hūṃ a massive vajra of meteoric iron, and above that,
namkhé ying né droom yik nga den bab
From the expanse of the sky, a five-coloured bhrūṃ descends.
droom ratna bhendza jnana tsakra mandala bhrum
bhrūṃ ratna bhanda jñāna cakra maṇḍala bhrūṃ
droom yik negyur trulpé shyalmé khang
The syllable bhrūṃ transforms into the emanated palace.
chi ni rinchen nang ni töpé khar
The outside of the palace is made of jewels, the inside of skulls.
dru shyi go shyi tsé dang tsennyi den
It has four corners and four doors, and possesses all the proper qualities and characteristics.
gu na ta ra tabab bang rim gyé
It has a guṇa-toraṇa16 archway with eight levels,
chökhor ridak duk dang norbü tok
Dharma-wheels, deer, parasols, and a jewel top-ornament.
chirol rinchen tsikpé ming gi shyi
On the outside, the foundations of the walls are made of jewels.
dönam marpor lhamo chudruk khö
On the red offering-ledges are the sixteen goddesses.
pagu serpo drawa draché dzé
The palace is adorned with yellow bricks and latticework.
sharbu da yak khang tsek dorjé tok
It has rain spouts and parapets, and the upper stories have vajra-ornaments.
nang ni durtrö rolwé shyalmé khang
The inside of the palace appears as a charnel ground.
chi khor ro ling gyé dang dorjé gur
On the outside it is surrounded by the eight charnel grounds and the vajra tent.
kalmé urur chemchem barwé long
Within the expanse of blazing apocalyptic fire, roaring and flashing,
womin sang chen rolwé podrang ché
Is the magnificent palace of the Unsurpassed17 realm ‘Display of the Great Secret’,
rab jik namchak tsakra tsib gyé ü
Utterly terrifying. In the centre of an eight-spoked wheel made of meteoric iron
dechen kuntuzangmö é long du
Is e, the expanse of great bliss—Samantabhadrā.18
jolsong tso nam drekpa chegu dzi
Within it, the beasts trample the nine great haughty ones.
ma chak pema tabshé nyida bar
On a lotus of non-attachment blaze the seats of sun and moon—method and insight.
rudra tra ti ti ra bam
rudra krodhi tira baṃ
pam pema mandala
paṃ padma-maṇḍala
ma surya mandala
ma sūrya-maṇḍala
a tsenda mandala
a candra-maṇḍala
hung, rangjung gyu yi heruka
Hūṃ. The naturally-arisen causal herukas19
yeshe ying né den la bab
Descend from the space of primordial wisdom and are seated.
nyamjor dewa chenpö dré
With the sound of the great bliss of union,
pakpa chö ching shyendön jé
Offerings are made to the nobles ones and others’ benefit accomplished.
yong gyur drebü heruka
They transform into the resultant herukas,
chemchok benza tötreng tsal
Mahottara Mighty Skull-Garlanded Vajra—20
tingnak u sum chak drukpa
Dark blue in colour, with three heads, six hands,
shyab shyi gyé kyi dortab dré
And four legs in champion’s stance,
gyal gö dü shyi chi né dzi
Trampling on the heads of the four gyalgong demons.21
yé kar gö ching shewé shyal
His right face is white, stern and laughing.
yön mar amtsik jikpar tön
His left is red and terrifying, with fangs bared,
ü ting ngamji trowö shyal
And his central face is blue with a wrathful and majestic expression.
ku chok rik nga u la dzok
The supreme forms of the five families are complete on his crown.
dorjé jakhyung chiwor ding
A vajra-garuḍa soars above his head.
chen gu jak dril chewa tsik
He has nine eyes, his tongue curls, and he bares his fangs.
yé kyi dangpo dorjé dang
His first right hand holds a vajra,
barpa khatam tama mé
The middle a khaṭvāṅga and the last hand holds fire.
yön gyi dangpo bhenda mar
His first left hand holds a red skull-cup,22
barpa tong shol tama na
The middle a plough, and the last
chak kyi dikpa gogu nam
An iron scorpion with nine heads.
durtrö pal gyi ché nam dzok
All the charnel ground accoutrements are complete.

nam shyal yum chok kunzang jor
He is in union with the supreme consort Sky-Faced Lady—23Samantabhadrā.
yepa tso khyü khatam nam
Her right hand embraces him and holds a khaṭvāṅga,
yönpa chakpé dungmar tob
Her left offers a red skull-cup of desire filled with blood.
kudok ngönmo gyen dangden
Her body is blue and bedecked with ornaments.
kalpé mepung barwé long
Amidst a blazing expanse of apocalyptic fire,
ga shyi dewa chenpor shyuk
They remain in the great bliss of the four joys.

palchen yabyum jortsam né
From the point of union of the Awesome One and consort
chok shyi tsam shyi tsib teng su
Dark blue hūṃ syllables radiate
tingnak hung gi yigé trö
To the spokes in the four cardinal and four intermediate directions
traktung yabyum sé ché kyé
And generate the herukas with their consorts and sons.
hum hum hum hum hum hum hum hum
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
hung chen ngak kyi dra drakpé
Through the resounding of the great hūṃ mantra
trogyal kyilkhor lhün gyi drub
The maṇḍala of wrathful kings is spontaneously present.
kalwé mé tar bar long né
Within the expanse blazing like apocalyptic fire,
rangjung yeshe tro tsok shar
Naturally arising, primordial wisdom appears as the gathering of wrathful ones.

shar du benza héru ting
In the East is Vajra-Heruka,24 blue in colour.
dorjé yé la dungtrak yön
His right hand holds a vajra, his left a skull-cup filled with blood.
benza kroti shori jor
He is in union with Vajra-Krodhiśvarī.

lho ru jampal shinjé ser
In the south is Mañjuśrī-Yamāntaka, yellow in colour.
bechön yé la dik dzub yön
His right hand holds a club, his left hand in the threatening mudrā.
baita zajé nakmo yum
His consort is the black devourer Vetālī.

nub tu wangchen tamdrin mar
In the West is mighty Hayagrīva, red in colour.
raldri yé la pema yön
His right hand holds a sword, his left a lotus.
pema ziden trogyal yum
His consort is the wrathful queen Splendid Lotus.

jang du dorjé shyönnu jang
In the North is Vajrakīla, green in colour.
chak nyi dorjé purbu dril
His two hands brandish a dagger.
khorwa gyendeb pal gyi yum
His awesome consort is Dīptacakrā.

sharlhor lamé heruka
In the south-east is Unsurpassable Heruka.25
tingnak jakhyung shying yuk tok
Dark blue in colour, he holds a garuḍa and corpse-mace.
yumchen nyi shyi demchokma
His great consort is Supreme Peace and Bliss.
ma nga lasok khor dangché
His retinue are the Five Mothers26 and others.

lhonub rigdzin dorjé kar
In the south-west is Vajra-Vidyādhara, white in colour.
tö yuk yé la drilbu yön
His right hand holds a skull-mace, his left a bell.
dechen dorjé naljor yum
His consort is Vajrayoginī, enjoying great bliss.

nubjang drekpa kün dul ting
In the north-west is Tamer of the Arrogant, blue in colour.27
towa yé la dungtung yön
His right hand holds a hammer, his left a short spear.
kham sum sipa chi dul yum
His consort is Universal Tamer of the Three Realms of Existence.

jangshar tobden nakpo ché
In the north-east is Mighty Black One.28
chakkyu yé la trul shyak yön
His right hand holds an iron hook, his left a snake-lasso.
jungwa nga yi dakmo yum
His consort is Lady of the Five Elements.
zuk kham khar dek dökham nön
She raises the form realm aloft and suppresses the desire realm.

kün kyang rik shyi khor dangché
All of them possess a retinue of the four families.
shyab kyi lhachen pomo dzi
With their feet they trample upon the great male and female gods.29
chönyi mingyur yum nam ting
To symbolize unchanging reality, the female deities are blue.
driguk tö dzin yab la khyü
They hold a curved knife and skull-cup, and embrace their male consorts.
chirol gowa rik shyi ni
On the outside are the gatekeepers of the four families.
chakkyu shyakpa chak drok dril
They hold, respectively, an iron hook, lasso, iron shackles and bell.
tsombu gu yi kyilkhor lha
These nine groups of maṇḍala deities,
düngya nyerngé lhatsok kün
All seven hundred and twenty-five,
nyi lé özer shyindu shar
Arise like rays from the sun.
kudok chaktsen gyencha luk
The colour of their bodies, implements and ornaments are all distinct,
ma dré yongdzok chenpor sal
Yet clearly visualized as the great completeness.
10. Empowerment
hum, rang lé sharwé palchen tsok
Hūṃ. The gathering of Awesome Ones arises from oneself.
tutsal yongsu dzok jé chir
In order to perfect power and strength,
ku sung tuk su jin lab ching
Bless my ordinary body, speech and mind into the enlightened body, speech and mind,
yeshe nga yi wangkur ro
And grant the empowerment of the five primordial wisdoms.
om ah hum
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
om hung so hrih ah
oṃ hūṃ svā hrīḥ āḥ
rang gi chiwor dawa la om
In my head, on a moon, is oṃ.
drinpar pema la ah
In my throat, on a lotus, is āḥ
nyinggar nyima la hung gi tsenpa lé özer trö
In my heart, on a sun, is hūṃ. From them radiate rays of light,
deshyin shekpa tamché chendrang
Inviting all the thus-gone ones,
yigé sum la tim
Who dissolve into the three syllables.
dé yongsu gyurpa lé
These completely transform
sangye tamché kyi ku sung tuk yeshe dorjé ngowor nampa nyishü changchub pé lha
Into the deities that are awakened in twenty aspects within the essence of the vajra-like primordial
wisdom of the enlightened body, speech, and mind of all the buddhas.30
chiwor namnang karpo khorlo dzinpa
On my crown is Vairocana, white in colour and holding a wheel.
drinpar nang ta marpo pema dzinpa
In my throat is Amitābha, red in colour and holding a lotus.
tuk kar mikyöpa ngönpo dorjé dzinpé gyetabpé shyi lam drebü yönten yongsu dzokpar gyur
In my heart is Akṣobhya, blue in colour and holding a vajra. By sealing the three places in
this way, the qualities of the ground, path and fruition are completely perfected.
Touch each place with the mudrās of the one-, three- and five-pointed vajra.
om sarva tathagata maha kaya benza sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ sarva-tathāgata mahā-kāya vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘haṃ
om sarva tathagata maha waka benza sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ sarva-tathāgata mahā-vāka vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘haṃ
om sarva tathagata maha tsitta benza sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ sarva-tathāgata mahā-citta vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘haṃ
Furthermore, on the respective points of your head, receive the empowerment of the five families
while forming the mudrā.
om maha shunyata jnana benza sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ mahā-śūnyatājñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātmako ‘ham
And:
om maha adarsha jnana benza sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ mahādarśa-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
om maha samata jnana benza sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ mahā-samatā-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
om maha pradya bekshana  jnana benza sobhawa atma ko ham
oṃ mahā-pratya-vekṣanā-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
om maha kritya nushtana jnana benza sobhava atmako ham
oṃ mahā-kṛtyānuṣṭhāna-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
chiwö né ngar wanglha yabyum jéchak gyepé shyudé chugyün changchub sem kyi rolpé wangkur
At the five points on the crown are the male and female empowerment deities in union; as their
passion increases, the bliss of melting unfolds as a river of bodhicitta, which grants
the empowerments,
nyönmongpa ngé drima jang
Purifies the stains of the five emotions,
pungpo nga rik ngé sangye su negyurwé küntak la shyenwang gi gyé tab
And transforms the five aggregates into the five buddha families. In this way the imputed nature
is sealed by the dependent nature.
chu lhakma chiwor lüpa lé
The remaining water overflows from the crown, and in this way
shyenwang la yongdrub kyi gyé teb shing yeshe gyurwa mepé dar u tsuk na dorjé chepa dang
The dependent nature is sealed by the truly existent nature. As a sign of unchanging, primordial
wisdom, the crown of the head is marked with a half-vajra
rikdak nangwa tayé kyi u gyenpar gyur
And crowned by Amitābha, the lord of the families.
Imagine this, and then:
nyinggé ö kyi rolpa chenpö chok chü deshyin shekpa tamché namkha gangwé kyilkhor gyi khorlor
benza samadza
Through the great display of light in your heart, the sky is filled with all the thus-gone ones
of the ten directions, the wheel of the maṇḍala—vajra-samāja!
In this way, make the request.
11. Invitation
Light incense that contains ‘great fat’ and play music.
hum, womin chöying dechen shyingkham né
Hūṃ. From the Unsurpassed, the space of reality, the pure realm of great bliss,
lhündrub rolpa yeshe long gü gar
Arises the spontaneously present display, the dance of the nine expanses of wisdom.31
shyitro rabjam palchen kagyé lha
Infinite peaceful and wrathful deities, Eight Awesome Herukas—32
dukpa dul chir né dir shek su sol
In order to tame the wicked, please come to this place!
éhyahi dza hung bam ho
ehy ehi jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
samaya hring hring dza dza
samaya hrīṃ hrīṃ jaḥ jaḥ
12. The Request to Remain
hum, madak nangwa dakpa rabjam kyi
Hūṃ. Impure appearances arise as the infinite purity of
ten dang tenpé khorlor yong sharwa
The wheel of the palace and the deities.33
tingdzin trulpé shying chok nyamgawar
In the supreme realm of joy emanated from samādhi,
damyé nyimé ngowor tenpar shyuk
May the indivisible nature of the samaya and wisdom deities remain firmly!
samaya abeshaya tishta lhen
samayāveśaya tiṣṭha lhan
13. Prostration
hum, rangjung rangshar trulpé kyilkhor la
Hūṃ. In the self-existent, naturally arisen, emanated maṇḍala,
zang ngen nyidzin küntok namdak kyang
Dualistic thoughts of good and bad are utterly pure.
rangrig chökur jalwé da chak gar
Yet still, within the dharmakāya of natural awareness, I display the symbolic homage,
panglang mepé ngang né tsalwar gyi
And free from adopting and abandoning, I prostrate!
atipu ho
atipu hoḥ
nama ya dhih
nama yadhiḥ
14. Offering the Mudrā of Dance
hum, gek pal jikrung ku yi gar
Hūṃ. Captivating, heroic and terrifying are the demeanours of your body.
gö shé drakshul sung gi gar
Menacing laughter, stern and ferocious are the demeanours of your speech.
nyingjé ngam shyi tuk kyi gar
Compassionate, awesome and peaceful are the demeanours of your mind
rangjung gar gü chöpa shyé
Please enjoy the offering of the naturally arising nine demeanours!
maha mudra putsa ho
mahā-mudrā pūja hoḥ
15. Offering of Wisdom Songs
hum, gawa chudruk dorjé lu
Hūṃ. The vajra song of the sixteen joys,
yeshe lu dang nyamjorwa
In union with the song of wisdom,
rang lé jung shying rang la chö
Arise from oneself and are offered to oneself.
mi tok yeshe ngön du tön
Show us in actuality non-conceptual, primordial wisdom!
maha jnana tété hum | téna tété hum
mahā-jñāna te te hūṃ | tena te te hūṃ
16. The Regular Offerings of Sensual Delights
hum nyerchö nga dang döyön kün
Hūṃ. The five regular offerings and all sensual delights
wangpo nga yi gyen du shar
Arise as ornaments of the five sense faculties.
chöpé chakgya chenpo yi
With this great mudrā of offering,
palchen lhatsok nyé gyur chik
Gathering of Awesome Deities, may you be pleased!
om shri benza sapariwara dhupé hum pupé tram aloké hrih ghandhé ho newidyé ah shabda hum sarva
pudza samaya ho
oṃ śrī-vajra-saparivāra dhūpe hūṃ | puṣpe trāṃ | āloke hrīḥ | gandhe hoḥ | naivedye āḥ | śabda
hūṃ | sarvapūjā samaya hoḥ
17. The Secret Offerings of the Fundamental Purity of the Three Poisons
hum, döchak trak chen shyedang rü
Hūṃ. Even the great blood of desire, the bones of anger,
timuk sha té duk sum yang
And the flesh of ignorance—the three poisons—
dö né sa ku sum chenpö ngang
Are primordially the three great kāyas.
rang lé shar shying rang sar drol
They arise from themselves and are liberated in their own place!
hala pentsa pudza ho
hala pañca-pūja hoḥ
18. Offering of Medicine
dorjé damtsik mepo ché
Vajra-samaya, O great wonder!
tsa gyé tong la jarwé dü
The demon of eight major and thousand minor ingredients
gyu druk dukngal jompé tsi
And the elixir which destroys the suffering of the six causes35
rik nga yeshe nga yi ngö
Are the five Buddha families and five primordial wisdoms.36
om ah hung sarva pentsa amrita hung hrih ta
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva-pañcāmṛta hūṃ hrīḥ ṭhaḥ

yingrik yabyum nangtong heruka
Basic space and awareness, male and female deity, appearance and emptiness—Heruka,
chö kyi dorjé khandro lé kyi wang
Vajradharma, Ḍākinī Karmendrāṇī,
rigdzin düpa lamé kyilkhor la
Maṇḍala of gurus of the Awareness-Holder Assembly—
nyongdrol dütsi men gyi chöpa bul
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva pentsa amrita kha ram khahi
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi

jampal dorjé trisong deutsen
Mañjuśrī-Vajra Trisong Detsen,
drubchen gyé dang lechen dakpé khor
Eight accomplished adepts37 with your pure retinue of destined disciples,
gyüpa dünden tuk ter dakpo la
Lord of mind treasures endowed with the seven lineages—38
nyongdrol dütsi men gyi chöpa bul
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva pentsa amrita kha ram khahi
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
Supplement:
First Dodrupchen
gang dé jezung gongter chö kyi dak
Held in his39 compassionate care, custodian of his Dharma mind treasures,
murub tsepö dögar nirmaka
Nirmāṇakāya manifestation of Prince Murub Tsenpo,40
jikme trinlé özer palbar la
Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer Palbar—
nyongdrol dütsi men gyi chöpa bul
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva pentsa amrita kha ram khahi
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi

dé sé tuwo chökyi lodrö dang
His heir, Chökyi Lodrö,41
bairö namtrul shyenpen tayé ö
Gyalsé Shenpen Tayé Ö—Vairocana incarnate—,
pemé lungten lamé dorjé tsal
And the one prophesied by Padmasambhava: unsurpassable Dorjé Tsal,42
nyongdrol dütsi men gyi chöpa bul
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva pentsa amrita kha ram khahi
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo
chok drub gyalpö yangsi chusumpa
Supremely accomplished thirteenth incarnation of the king,43
ngotsar kabab dünden dongak ling
You, Dongak Lingpa, possess the wondrous authoritative transmissions.
gyü sol kündü tsawé lama la
Embodiment of all lineages and traditions, root guru—
nyongdrol dütsi men gyi chöpa bul
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva pentsa amrita kha ram khahi
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
Written by the Third Dodrupchen Rinpoche.
yeshe gu dzok traktung kyilkhor lha
To the deities of the heruka maṇḍalas in whom the nine wisdoms are perfected,
pal gyi ka dong jikten drekpé dé
Attendants of the Awesome One, classes of arrogant worldly spirits,
düngya nyernga samyé lhündrub la
Seven hundred and twenty-five deities, beyond the imagination and spontaneously present—
nyongdrol dütsi men gyi chöpa bul
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva pentsa amrita kha ram khahi
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
19. Receiving the accomplishment
dütsi nyingpochen gyi ü
In the middle of the kapāla44
sangye kün gyi ku sung tuk
Are the enlightened body, speech and mind of all the buddhas
yigé sum gyi nampachen
In the form of the three syllables.
damtsik chakgya nyenpö lang
Respectfully receive it with the samaya-mudrā!45
kaya siddhi om
kāya-siddhi oṃ
waka siddhi ah
vāka-siddhi āḥ
tsitta siddhi hum
citta-siddhi hūṃ
Receive it with your thumb and ring-finger, which are a locket of the sun and moon.
20. Offering the Samaya Substance of Torma
hum, bhaga yangpé torshyong du
Hūṃ. In the torma vessel of the vast bhaga,
linga döyön tormar bar
The liṅga torma of sensual delights blazes.
dorjé zawé damtsik dzé
The samaya substances of vajra food—
a la la té gyepar rol
A la la! Enjoy them with delight!
maha balingta khahi
mahā-baliṅte khāhi
21. Offering of Rakta
hum, jang lor chepé dung chen du
Hūṃ. In a great skull with scalp and hair
chakdang ying su dralwé trak
Is the blood of desire and anger liberated in basic space.
khorwa né su dak jé chir
To purify saṃsāra in its own place,
langdor mepa shyé su sol
Without adopting or rejecting, please accept it!
maha rakta khahi
mahā-rakta khāhi
22. Offering of Ambrosia in an Uncompromisingly Secret Manner
hum, yab dang yum gyi gyu nyi kyang
Hūṃ. The male and female deity, the two causes,46
chakgya shyi yi kyen gyi jar
Are joined through the condition of the four mudrās.47
duk nga men du gyurpé dzé
The five poisons are transformed into medicine—
dzagé pawö dütsi chö
This jagad, the deathless drink of heroes, I offer!48
maha benza amrita dzagé pudza ho
mahā-vajrāmṛta-jagad pūja hoḥ
23. Offering of Union and Liberation
hum, dorjé pemö drongkhyer la
Hūṃ. I strongly invoke the vajra to enter into
nyompar shyukpar rab kulwé
The city of the lotus and join in union.
lhatsok kün kyang nyé gyur té
All the deities are delighted and
dukngal dewa chenpor jor
Unite suffering with great bliss49
namtok dakmé ying su drol
And liberate thoughts in the space of selflessness.
dza hung bam ho | tana gana pudza ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ | tana-gana pūja hoḥ
24. Praise
hum, miduk sinpö ku ni gek ching pa
Hūṃ! Your form of an ugly rākṣasa is captivating and heroic,
drakshul dorjé gemo shewé dra
Your vajra laughter is menacing and you make ferocious and stern sounds,
chok tu shyiwé tuk ni nyingjé ngam
Your supremely peaceful mind is compassionate and awesome;
gar gü sa sum namnön khyö la tö
With your nine demeanours you suppress the three realms—you I praise!

dorjé tötrak chakdang ying su jor
Your vajra and blood-filled skull unite desire and anger with basic space.
khatam tong shol duk sum ta gö jom
Your khaṭvāṅga50 and plough destroy the wild, uncultivated three poisons.
mepung chakdik namtok gyalgong shé
Your flame and iron scorpion slay thoughts and gyalgong spirits.
tokmé drekpa dul la chaktsal tö
To you who are beyond concepts and the tamer of arrogant ones, I prostrate!

chöku gyurwa mepé kudok ting
Since the dharmakāya is unmoving, your body is blue.
u ni ku sum chak ni parchin druk
Your heads symbolize the three kāyas and your hands the six perfections.
shyab ni tsemé shyi yi rangshyin té
Your legs have the nature of the four immeasurables.
tak dang yönten dzokpé ku la tö
To your body, which is complete with all the marks and qualities, I pay homage!

chönyi chik la yeshe long gü tsal
Reality is singular, yet its radiance is the nine expanses of wisdom.51
duljé kham la gyé chak trowé nyam
According to the capacity of students, you appear joyful, desirous or angry.
rolpé chotrul mizé barwé ku
Your form is a magical display that blazes unbearably—
düngya nyerngé kyilkhor lha la tö
To the seven hundred and twenty-five deities of the maṇḍala, I pay homage!
25. Mantra Recitation
Here there is the approach, the accomplishment, and the application of activities.
1. The Peaceful Approach Phase
daknyi chemchok yabyum gyi
I am Mahottara in union with the consort.
tuk chok ö kyi drawé long
In my excellent heart, amidst an expanse of latticed light,
saltong zungjuk nyidé teng
Upon a sun and moon—the union of clarity and emptiness—
kunzang yabyum shyal jor la
Is Samantabhadra in union with his consort.
dorjé kyiltrung nyam shyakchen
He sits in cross-legged vajra posture in meditative equipoise.
tukkar deshek kün gyi sok
At his heart is the life-force of all the bliss-gone ones—
yigé dru sum tsek mar sal
The three syllables, assembled one above the other, clearly visualised.
dé lé ö trö nangsi kün
They radiate light, and I consider that all of appearance and existence
yeshe nga ru sangye gyur
Awakens as the five primordial wisdoms.
With the view that sees the single taste of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa:52
om ah hum
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Meditate on the supreme lord of all the families,53
The ancestor of all the buddhas.
“If you accomplish one bliss-gone one,
All the maṇḍalas of victorious ones beyond the imagination are accomplished.”
The approach according to numbers is thirty million.54
Those who want to reach buddhahood in one life
Should constantly and fervently engage with this practice.
If you meditate on the in- and out-breath as mantra,
Your aggregates will dissolve into a body of light.
samaya
Samaya!
2. The Wrathful Accomplishment
yeshe gyalpo tang chal gyi
In the heart of the wisdom king and queen in union,55
tuk kar pema nyidé teng
Upon a lotus, sun and moon,
ser gyi dorjé ra gupé
Is a golden vajra with nine prongs.
ü rar tingdzin sempa hung
In the central prong is the concentration-being56 hūṃ.
ra gyé dün né rimpa shyin
In the eight prongs, beginning with the front, are
tokta nyi dang drongkhyer druk
The first, the six cities, and the last.57
kün kyang tukké hung la ta
All of them are turned toward the hūṃ in the centre,
shintu tra shying özer bar
Extremely subtle and blazing with light rays.
om guru shri benza yaksha krodha tsitta hum
oṃ guru-śrī-vajra-yakṣa-krodha-citta hūṃ
Enhancing the clear appearance of the deity and
The nail of radiating and absorbing are done alternately.
rang rang ngak kyi yikdru lé
From the seed syllables of the mantra,
ngak treng lugu gyü du tön
A string of mantra-garlands emanates.
yab né yum gyi shyal du shyuk
It exits the male deity and enters the mouth of the female deity.
ku yi ying gyü kha sang né
It flows through the form of her body58 and from her secret space,
dorjé norbü lam shyuk té
Entering the path of the vajra-jewel.
tuk sok hung la tim shying khor
It dissolves into the life-force hūṃ at the heart and revolves.
dewa chenpö özer gyi
The light rays of great bliss
gyalwa chö ching ngödrub yik
Make offerings to the victorious ones and gather all the jewel-like accomplishments,
tamché dü né rang la tim
Which then dissolve into me.
lar trö drowé lé nyön jang
Once again light radiates, purifying the karma and emotions of beings.
kün kyang palchen gopang la
All of them are brought to the supreme level
dangpor möpé göpa té
Of the Awesome Heruka.59
When planting the nail that merges
Deity, pure realm, and dharmatā as one,
One’s own perception is awakened in the ultimate Akaniṣṭha—
There is no doubt about this.
hum hum hum
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
Although an inconceivable host of deities is radiated and absorbed,
They are the magical manifestations of the chief deity alone.
If you attain mastery over the life-force of the Awesome One,
The circle of deities will arise without effort.
lhatsok kün kyang chi dril ngak
The whole assembly of deities resounds with the all-embodying mantra,60
ung chem druk gi dra shyin drok
With a roaring and rumbling sound.
ngaden ö kyi tongsum gang
Five-coloured light fills the three thousand-fold cosmos, through which
nedön shyi shying tsé pal gyé
Diseases and evil spirits are pacified, lifespan and glory increase,
kham sum wang dü mikja dral
The three realms are magnetized, and beings liberated.
rigdzin shyi yi né tob gyur
Consider that you attain the four levels of an awareness-holder.
om benza tsenda sarva dushtam takahana dahapatsa hung pé
oṁ vajra-caṇḍa-sarva-ḍuṣtāntaka hana daha paca hūṁ phaṭ61
As for the main mantra,62 you are allowed to perform the activities if you recite the mantra
100,000 times multiplied by the amount of syllables of the mantra.63
Otherwise, multiply that by four.64
The all-embodying mantra65 should be recited a tenth part of that.
In this practice, you practice the guru in the form of the yidam deity,
And so the blessings are swift.
This text is the quintessence of all the Heruka Tantras
Such as the Galpo.66
Since this practice is taken from the life-force of the Awesome Ones,
It is powerful and quick, without the need to depend on activities.67
The rivers of empowerment of this practice are unimpaired;
Moreover, it is endowed with the seven lineages. Therefore accomplishment is close at hand.
The whole ocean of the tantra sections of the Great Secret
Is gathered in the classes of the eight great sādhanas.

For those of inferior intellect, who are not able to fathom the ocean-like depth
Of the eight awareness-holders, the four scholars, and the earlier and later adepts,
I have gathered everything into this quintessential practice.
Apart from this, nothing else was spoken.68 Guhya!
3. Applying the Activities
kechik namchak dorjé ni
Instantly, a vajra of meteoric iron appears.
tsé gu tongsum gangwé khyön
It has nine prongs, and in the blazing interior of the hub,
bub tong barwé towa ru
Within an expanse as vast as the three thousand-fold cosmos,
pal gu ngampé drak ngak drok
Are the nine Awesome Ones. Through their fury, the fierce mantra resounds.
yar tsé gyé kyi sokshing la
In the upper part near the eight tips of the life-force axis
tubwang düdul chajé chen
Are the lords of saints69 in the guise of demon tamers,
nampa shyi yi khor gyi kor
Surrounded by a fourfold retinue.
ra la rigdzin drubtob gyé
In the prongs are the eight accomplished awareness-holders,
nyen shyu pö chen dik dzubchen
With hat, great gown, and threatening mudrā.
drangsong möpa lé kyi ché
They cast spells of sages and wear the accoutrements of activity.
kün kyang dza jo pé kyi dra
With the sounds jaḥ, bhyoh, and phaṭ,
guk dral barwé lé la tsön
They all exert themselves in the activities of summoning, liberating, and transferring.
mar tsé gu yi gongpo gü
The lower nine tips pierce the nine gongpo demons
nyingga wangchen shyi la puk
Through their hearts, reaching all the way down to the mighty base.
chang zung tsakra tsib gyepé
In the openings of the central handle’s eight-spoked wheel
chen la trulpé chakdik cho
Soars an emanated iron scorpion.
pudri yön du khorwa yi
Razors turning anti-clockwise
nöjé dra dön nyal nyal tub
Slice harm-doers, enemies, and harmful influences into pieces.
dikpé hab hab zöpa yi
The scorpion eats
lokpar drenpé dra dré dang
Misleading forces, enemies, spirits,
khyepar gongpo pün gü dé
Especially the ranks of the Nine Gongpo Brothers,
dzé la mé ché tabur gyur
Just like flames consuming tinder.
om ah hung benza yaksha krodha sarva dushtam hana hana hung pé
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-yakṣa-krodha sarva-ḍuṣtān hana hana hūṁ phaṭ
In the future, at the end of this eon,
People will engage in mantra, yet tear apart their samaya.
They will fall under the power of gongpo spirits
And act inappropriately in all kinds of ways.
All of this arises from the view of self-grasping.
To remove the cause and result of this,
There is no antidote but this practice.
Killing tiny living things and pulverizing huge mountains70
Are signs that arrogant spirits are bound under oath.
Act according to your experience and contemplate what is appropriate:
If you lack meditative concentration, you will be a threat to yourself.
Therefore, learned ones need to know what is right livelihood.
As for practices for si spirits,71 astrological obstacles, black magic of ritual daggers, and
so on,
You need to think about each one accordingly.
There is no doubt that obstacles will be subdued.

The Conclusion: The Stages of the Feast-Gathering
hum, palchen tuk lé ram yam kham
Hūṃ. From the heart of Awesome One radiate raṃ, yaṃ, and khaṃ,
tröpé tsok kyi ngödzin jang
Purifying grasping at the feast-offerings as real.
nangsi dechen kapalar
Within the kapāla of the great bliss of appearance and existence,
chü nam rik ngé damdzé gyur
The essences become the samaya substances of the five families.
om ah hung ha ho hrih
oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
The Invitation
hum, womin chöying podrang dang
Hūṃ. From the Unsurpassed, the palace of basic space,
yenlak dünden longchö dzok
The saṃbhogakāya endowed with the seven branches
rangshyin tulkü shyingkham né
And the pure realm of the nature-nirmāṇakāya,72
palchen kyilkhor lhatsok dang
We invite the host of deities of the Awesome One’s maṇḍala.

né dang nyené nampa nyi
In the places and secondary places,
yul ni rolpa nyé yul rol
The lands of play and secondary lands of play,
shying dang nyewé shying dang ni
The fields and secondary fields,
du dang nyewé duwa dang
The meeting places and secondary meeting places,
tsen do nyewé tsen do té
The chandoha and upacchandoha—
heruka yi né chu dang
The ten sacred places of the Herukas;73
durtrö chenpo silwé tsal
The great Cool Grove charnel ground, and
odiyanar pema tsek
In Uḍḍiyāna, Lotus Mound,
zahor yul na khujuk long
In Zahor, Cuckoo Expanse,
singhé yul na ku la dzok
In Siṃha,74 Perfected in Body,
khaché yul na hé chen rol
In Kashmir, Display of Great Bliss,
balwö yul na yamakha
In Nepal, Yamakha,
togar yul na sangchen rol
In Tukhara,75 Display of the Great Secret,
liyul jikten ngöndzok té
And in Khotan, Perfected World—
durtrö chenpo gyé nam na
The eight great charnel grounds—
shyukpé pawo khandro dang
All who reside there—heroes76 and ḍākinīs,
shukdro naljor shyingkyong nam
Energetic Spirits,77 yogis, and protectors of the realms—
tsok la chendren shek su sol
I invite you to this feast-gathering, please come!

tsokkhang di ni trulpé shying
This assembly hall is an emanated, pure abode.
tsokdzé döyön rolwé gyen
The feast substances are an adornment of sensual delights.
tab dang sherab chamdral den
The brothers and sisters—method and insight—
dorjé lugar jinré chak
And their vajra songs and dances are magnificent,
chang té'u drilbu nyen ching trol
Their small skull-drums78 rattling, their bells ringing.
di ni damtsik chok gi né
This is the place of supreme samaya!
shak dang tsöpa kucho mé
There are no quarrels, disputes, or clamour.
rigpa tulshyuk nyam dangden
With the experience of knowledgeable yogic conduct,
damtsik di ni dang du shyé
Enact this samaya!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
guru deva dakini dharmapala samaya dza
guru-deva-ḍākinī-dharmapāla-samaya jaḥ
The first portion
hum, sangye damtsik lanamé
Hūṃ. The samaya of the buddhas is unsurpassed.
sha nga dütsi nampa nga
The five meats and the five ambrosias
zacha tungwa chi yi tsok
Are the outer feast of food and drink.
döyön lhamo nampa nga
The five goddesses of sensual delights
wangpö longchö nang gi tsok
Are the inner feast of the enjoyment of the senses,
detong yeshe lanamé
Unsurpassed, primordial wisdom of bliss and emptiness
ga shyi namrol sangwé tsok
Is the secret feast of the play of the four joys.
kyilkhor lha nga chöpa bul
All of this I offer to the deities of the maṇḍala!
shyé né wang dang ngödrub tsol
Having accepted it, grant us empowerment and accomplishments!
gana tsakra putsa ho
gaṇacakra-pūja hoḥ
The Intermediate Portion: Confession
hum, gangshyik trulpar gyurpa dené zung
Hūṃ. Ever since I became confused,
nammin lü la tenpa desi du
And as long as I possess this body of karmic ripening,
mi gé chu dang tsammé nyewa nga
I have committed and will commit the ten negative actions, the five inexpiable crimes, the five
similar to inexpiable crimes,
chiwa chudruk lokpa gyé lasok
The sixteen severe mistakes, the eight wrongs, and so on—
tekpa sum dang rigpa dzinpa yi
Without concealing anything
dom sum damtsik nyampa tadak kün
I confess all impairments of the three vows of the three vehicles
gana tsok kyi khorlo la ten né
And the samayas of the awareness-holders,
chabpa mepé sem kyi tol lo shak
On the basis of this gaṇacakra feast-offering.
dak tsang chenpö ngödrub dak la tsol
Grant me the accomplishment of great utter purity!
Recite the 100-syllable heruka mantra.
om heruka sato samaya | manupalaya | heruka sato tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava | sutokhayo mé
bhava | supokhayo mé bhava | anurakto mé bhava | sarva siddhi mé prayaccha | sarva karma
su tsa mé | tsittam shreyang | kuru hung | ha ha ha ha ho | bhagavan | sarva tatagata heruka
ma mé muntsa heruka bhava maha samaya sato ah
oṃ herukasatvasamayam anupālaya herukasatva tvenopatiṣṭha ḍṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo
me bhava anurakto me bhava sarvasiddhiṃ me prayaccha sarvakarmasu ca me cittaṃ śreyaḥ
kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavan sarvatathāgataheruka mā me muñca heruka bhava mahāsamayasattva
āḥ
Lastly: The Offering of Liberation
é lé tarmé sipé drub khung nang
From e arises the inescapable prison-pit of existence.
marik trulpé chingpa dak té dra
The enemy of the view of self, bound through confusion and ignorance,
yeshe ying la dribpé zungdzin gek
And the obstacle makers of dualistic grasping, who obscure the space of primordial wisdom,
dakchen yeshe rigpé chakkyü zung
Are held by the hook of awareness—primordial wisdom of great purity—,
nyampar ma shyak mepé shyakpé ching
Bound by the lasso which never wavers from meditative equipoise,
lhaktong lugu gyü kyi drawé dom
Caught by the net woven from the threads of clear seeing,79
jetob trulpa mepé drilbü nyö
And intoxicated by the bell of faultless post-meditation.
pungpo nga yi nyewar lenpa kün
All clinging to the five aggregates
dakmé tokpé tsön gyi nampar tub
Is cut through by the weapon of the realization of selflessness!
kyemé tröpé lhatsok shyal du tab
I offer it to the gathering of unborn wrathful deities
mamsa rakta tsitta goré tsana bhasu ta kem nirti tana tsakra putsa kha kha khahi khahi
māṃsa rakta citta gorocanā vasutāḥ keṃ nirti80 tana cakra pūja kha kha khāhi khāhi
If you want to elaborate, fulfil the sacred pledge with The Spontaneous Vajra Song of Fulfilment
and Confession.81
The Remainder
Put the remainder on a ‘skin from the great fields’.
With the samaya-mudrā of the herukas, spit on the substances.82
And bless them with the following mantra:
om akaro mukhaṃ sarwa dharmanam adya nutpannatota om ah hung phat soha
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarva-dharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Together with the ‘Song of Banishment’,83 say the following:
kyé, dangpo pü kyi mi chö gyu
Kyeḥ! First, offer the best portion
palchen kyilkhor tsok kyi dak
To the maṇḍala of Awesome Ones, the lords of the feast.
bardu shakpa mi gyi gyu
Second, do the confession,
naljor den la damtsik nyen
Since for yogis the samaya is severe.
tama dral tab mi gyi gyu
Finally, offer the liberation,
tokpé dak gyü ngön dral chir
Because the continuum of self has been liberated through realization.
danta lhakmé mi chö gyu
Now, offer the remainder—
ma tsok wangchuk ging langka
Hosts of Mothers,84 lords, kiṃkaras, and laṅkas,
ponya sumgya drukchu sok
The three hundred and sixty messengers, and others—
kün kyang palchen trulpa yin
Even you all are emanations of the Awesome One.
lhakma khachü mi dren gyu
The remainder must be sprinkled with spit
damtsik chik tu sewé chir
In order to mix the samaya as one.85
bang tok jé yi mi nen gyu
The Lord must suppress his subjects
chi chol lé la kulwé chir
In order to exhort them to perform what has been entrusted.
jé la bang kyi mi gal gyu
The subjects must revolt against their lord
drakshul lé tab nyurwé chir
So that he may employ the swift skillful means of wrathful activity.86

hum, namdak rangshyin shyiwa lé
Hūṃ. From the natural peace of utter purity,
chomden palchen trulpa ni
The victorious Awesome Lord emanates.
tabshé da sang rolpa lé
From the play of method and insight, the secret moon,87
kyilkhor muren kyongwa té
Arise the protectors of the maṇḍala’s perimeter.
khyechak ngön gyi yal gamchen
All of you who previously made an oath:
lak na lonying nangtrol tok
In your hands you hold up lungs, hearts, and intestines,
leknyé tangdzin tsokkhang nyul
And roam the assembly hall, judging good and bad,
tu dang dzutrul paktumé
With limitless strength and magical powers.
ngöntsé palchen heruké
In the past, when the Awesome Heruka
duk sum rudra dralwé tsé
Liberated the rudra of the three poisons,
khelang damché dren gyi la
Your made a promise and oath—remember that!
sinmö za lam chenpo ru
On the great feeding pathway of the rākṣasīs,88
pam pab long la tenpa sung
Accept the leftovers and protect the teachings!
cholpé trinlé drubpar dzö
Carry out the activity entrusted to you!
Invoking the Sacred Pledge
hum, mi né yeshe chökü podrang né
Hūṃ. From the palace of the dharmakāya of non-abiding, primordial wisdom,
longchö dzokpa shyi dang trowö lha
Arise the peaceful and wrathful deities of the saṃbhogakāya—
tukdam kul lo drowé dön la gong
I invoke your sacred pledge! Think of the benefit of beings!
rigpé rangshyin deshek nyingpo yang
Although the nature of awareness is the buddha nature,
marik dzinpé künshyi lung ma ten
Based on the indeterminate all-ground clinging to ignorant perception,
go ngé yul dang ten ching drelpa lé
The objects of the five senses and dependent arising,
rik druk gyü ngé né su khyampa nam
Beings wander among the six classes and five types of beings.
lé dang nyönmong tu yi zirwé tu
Tormented by the power of their karma and emotions,
chirol yul la minpé dukngal dang
They experience suffering that has ripened as outer objects:
né tsön mugé dragek jungpö dön
Disease, war, famine, enemies, obstacles, the harmful influence of elemental spirits,
jikpa chenpo gyé dang chudruk kün
The eight great fears and the sixteen fears—
ngönchö drakpö rolpé tsarché né
All these are annihilated through the display of your violent, wrathful action.
loktok ngöpor shyenpé semchen nam
Beings who cling to entities because of wrong views
gyundré tekpa shyen gyi dul kawé
Are difficult to tame by the other vehicles of cause and effect.
rangjung yeshe tokpé trinlé dzö
Carry out your enlightened activity that induces realization of naturally arising, primordial
wisdom!
Proclaiming the Covenant
hum, dü sum namdak kuntuzangpö dü
Hūṃ. At the time of the utter purity of the three times—Samantabhadra—
ngöndzok yeshe dampé womin du
In the Unsurpassed—the sacred and fully-perfected primordial wisdom—
künshyi yi chö dakpé tönpa yi
The teacher of the purity of the all-ground, mind, and its object,
rangnang rangshyin mepé khor tsok la
Teaches his retinue—who are his own perception and lack inherent existence—
gyalwa gonggyü dzokpé yoga sum
The three yogas of the mind-direct transmission of the buddhas,
da tsik jöpa dralwar tenpé tsé
Beyond signs, words, and expressions.
drak chen salwé tönpa chunyi dang
At that time, the twelve renowned teachers of clarity,89
garab pawo sang dzin dorjé chö
The hero Garab, the keeper of secrets Vajradharma,
da gyü rigdzin drubpa chok nam kyi
And the supremely accomplished awareness-holders of the sign transmission
tönkhor gongpa chikpé wang tob shyin
Received the empowerment where the teacher and the retinue are in wisdom mind one.
tsok gyé rangdrol torma di shyé la
Accept this torma of the naturally liberated eight consciousnesses!
trulpa shyi la dakpé trinlé dzö
Perform the enlightened activity that purifies confusion into the ground!

dé jé sang ngak tenpa jungwé tsé
Later, when the teachings of secret mantra arose,
ok min ganden rirab lhünpö tsé
In the Unsurpassed, the Joyous Realm,90 and on the peak of Mount Meru—
lha né sum du drakpé né chok dang
The sacred places renowned as the Three Divine Realms,
shambhala dang orgyen zahor yul
As well as in Shambala, Uḍḍiyāna, and Zahor,
singala dang namchak barwé tsé
In Siṃhala on the peak of the Blazing Meteoritic Mountain,91
chörten chenpo déjé tsekpa ru
And at the great stūpa Blissful Mound,
rigdzin denö tadak babpé tsé
When all the scriptural collections of the awareness-holders were taught,
jikten jikten depé khandro dang
You, ḍākinīs of this world and beyond
kyilkhor muren kyongwa tamché kyi
And all the protectors of the maṇḍala’s perimeter,
torma len ching leknyé tangdzin pé
Took the torma and promised to judge good and bad.
khelang damcha shyindu trinlé dzö
Now, in accordance with your vow, carry out your activities!

dé jé dro döndü la babpé tsé
Later, when the time had arrived to benefit beings,
ludrub nyingpo pema tötreng sok
The eight great accomplished awareness-holders
drubpé rigdzin chenpo gyé nam kyi
Such as Nāgārjuna-garbha and Skull-Garlanded Lotus92
dzambüling du dar shying gyé dzé ching
Spread the teachings far and wide in this world.
khyepar drak mar pal gyi chimpu ru
In particular, when in the Red Cave of glorious Chimphu
rigdzin lobpön pema jungné kyi
The vidyādhara master Padmasambhava
lhasé gyalpo tsangpé metok la
Opened the sādhana class maṇḍala of the Eight Herukas
drubpa kagyé kyilkhor shyal ché shying
To the divine King Trisong Detsen,
sengé namrol khépuri yi tser
And when, on the Lion’s Display93 at Khepuri peak,94
nöjin tamché dam la shyakpé tsé
All you yakṣas were bound under oath,
soknying pul té cheto zungwa tar
You gave your life-force and agreed to the covenant.
chötor shyé la trinlé drubpar dzö
Accept this offering torma and carry out your activities!

dé jé tsok dün rolpa balpö yul
Later, in Nepal, the display of his seven consciousnesses,
rangnang chörten jarung khashor du
Near the Jarung Kashor Stūpa,95 his own perception,
rangjung dorjé jikme lingpa la
‘Naturally Arisen Vajra’, Jigme Lingpa,
ying kyi khandrö namkha dzö kyi da
Was given, by the ḍākinī of basic space, the signs of the space treasury—
yeshe ngaden trulpé shok ser lé
Magically created yellow scrolls endowed with the five primordial wisdoms.
drak mar drégu tsekpé gé'u ru
There it was written that when, in the Red Rock Cave of Drégu Tsekpa,96
kuntuzangpo drimé özer gyi
Samantabhadra Drimé Özer97
ka gya lung dzok tegya trolwé tsé
Released the seals of secrecy and gave the transmissions and entrustments,
chen chik trak tu kholwé mamo dang
You, the Mother with one eye and boiling blood
jarok tsukpü dzinpé drangsong gi
And the sage with a crow above his head,98
khelang tatsik shyindu trinlé dzö
Gave your promise—in accordance with this, carry out your activities!
Maintaining the Twelve Immovable Goddesses99
Sprinkle the Torma with the cleansing water
jo, tsok dang ka yi daknyi ni
Bhyoḥ. As the Ladies of the assembly and keepers of the sacred words,
trak tung dorjé namkhé yum
You are Vajra Herukas’ sky-consorts.
gangri chen gyi yullha ni
As the local deities of the snowy mountains of Tibet,
dü dang nöjin menmo shyi
You are the four demonesses, four yakṣiṇīs, and four medicine women—100
tsur chön tsur jön torma long
Come! Come and accept this torma.
tendrel yenlak chunyi dang
You purify the twelve interdependent links
dü jor chunyi né dakpé
And the twelve zodiac signs, while at the same time you are their natural purity.
bal bö tsam na tseringma
On the border of Nepal and Tibet, Tseringma;
la tö dorjé yama kyong
In Latö,101 Dorjé Yamakyong;
nöjin gang la kunzangmo
On mount Nöjin, Kunzangmo;
drok chen khor dul gek kyi tso
Drokchen Khordul, chief of obstacle makers;
jomo gang rar chenchikma
On the snowy Mount Everest, Chenchikma;
jang na khading lumo gyal
In the North, Khading Lumo Gyal;
kha rak dorjé khyung tsünma
On Mount Kharak, Dorjé Khyung Tsünma;
machen pomrar drakmo gyal
On Machen Pomra, Drakmo Gyal;
kong tsün demo bökham kyong
Kongtsün Demo, protectress of the realm of Tibet;
drok tsen dorjé menchikma
In Drok Tsen, Dorje Menchikma;
jomo nak gyal yarmo sil
Jomo Nakgyal Yarmo Si;
ü na dorjé zulé men
In Central Tibet, Dorje Zulemen;
kün kyang pemé kanyen té
All of you are attendants of Padmasambhava:
dam la né shing rik la go
Abide by your samayas and aid your family.
tatsik shyindu torma long
According to your oath, take this torma
ta yi mak dang gyadré tsub
And protect us from armies at the borders and the turmoil of the Gyadre.
mutek gyuwé go trang dang
Protect us from the pitfalls of heretics
gongpo pün gü né dal sung
And the pestilence of the nine Gongpo brothers.
takché tarpar trulpa yi
Avert the view of personality that confuses permanence and nihilism as liberation,
jik tsok tawa umar dok
And dissolve it in the Middle.102
dendön nampa chunyi kyi
Carry our your activity of spreading the teachings
tenpa darwé trinlé dzö
Of the twelve aspects of the Truths.103
om la la | lé lé | tam tam | té té | kha rakma | mama singdroma hung jo hung hung
oṃ la la | le le | taṃ taṃ | te te kharagma | ma ma singdroma hūṃ bhyoḥ hūṃ hūṃ
Horse Dance
Visualize the torma vessel as Mount Meru and turn it around.
hum, damsi jawé dikchen khyö
Hūṃ. You evil ones, si spirits who cause us to break our samaya—
drowa yong kyi gyü la gol
Fleeing the yogic discipline of the mind set on awakening,
changchub sem kyi tulshyuk drö
You attack the minds of all beings.
nen no tongchen oktu nen
I suppress you! I suppress you beneath the weight of the great thousand-fold universe!
tang do chusin drewar té
I bind you! I bind you to the neck of a sea monster.
gyur ro shinjé kha ru gyur
I banish you! I banish you into the mouth of Death.
sek go yeshe mé yi sek
I burn you! I burn you with the fire of wisdom!
dak tu tawa mashyikpar
Until the view of self is eradicated,
kalpa shyik kyang mi tang ngo
Even if this aeon is destroyed, you won’t be released!
om ah hung satom bhayalam nen
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sthabhaya lam nan
Receiving Accomplishments
Recite the offering and praise as before.
hum, jinlab kün gyi tsawa lama ni
Hūṃ. Guru, source of all blessings,
ngödrub tsol chir palchen rolpé lha
To grant us accomplishment you manifest as the display of the Awesome Deities.
namtar go sum tuk kyi kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of awakened mind—the three doors of liberation—
rangshyin yongdrub changchub sem kyi ngö
The actual bodhicitta, the truly existent nature:
chakgya chenpo chok gi ngödrub tsol
Grant me the supreme accomplishment of Mahāmudrā:
sa chu lam nga wang chu chinang nyi
The ten grounds and five paths; the ten empowerments, outer and inner;
rigdzin shyi dang ku nga yeshe nga
The four awareness-holder levels; the five kāyas and five wisdoms;
drubchen gyé dang trinlé nampa shyi
The eight accomplishments, and the four enlightened activities.
khorwé rangshyin lobur dribpa nyi
Saṃsāra’s nature is the two adventitious stains
künshyi kham la bak la nyal gyi tsul
That lie dormant in the all-ground consciousness—
shintu namdak namkün chokden gyi
Purify them! Grant us right here, right now,
ngödrub dampa dengdir tsal du sol
The sacred accomplishment, supreme in every way!
oṃ guru śrī vajrayakṣa krodha citta hūṃ
dharmakaya sambhokaya nirmakaya tsitta siddhi pala hung
dharmakāya | saṃbhogakāya | nirmākāya citta siddhi phala hūṃ
Touch the accomplishment substances to your three places and taste them.
Once again, as a thanksgiving, recite the offerings and praise.
Confession
ho, ngak kyi ngödrub malüpa
Hoḥ. All the accomplishments of the Mantra Vehicle
damtsik nyi la ten gyur kyang
Depend on the samayas.
mong dang marik nyönmongpé
Yet, overpowered by confusion,
zil gyi nönpa dakchak ni
Ignorance and destructive emotions,
nyepa dumé nö lak té
We have numerous flaws and are rife with faults.
gönpo tukjé ché nam kyi
Compassionate guardians:
tuk la trowa mi nga yang
Although you are without anger,
leknyé tangdzin dakpo nam
Since you are the judges of good and bad,104 your harsh retribution will be brought down
kyön tong tsam na chepa chö
If you see a mere mistake.
gal shying nongpa chichi pa
I openly acknowledge and confess
tol lo shak so tsangpar tsol
All my transgressions and mistakes. Grant me purification!
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra three times and make heartfelt confession.
Dissolution
hung, nöchü lha dang shyalyé su
Hūṃ. The pure forms of the world and inhabitants
sharwa dakpé nöchü kyang
Are the appearances of the palace and deities,
ten nyi tenpa lha nam kyang
The support and supported—
tsowo la tim deyang hung
All dissolve into the main deities. They dissolve into hūṃ.
shyabkyu né zung na dewar
From the shabkyu105 up to the nāda,
rim yal dömé shi su a
Everything dissolves in stages into the original nature—āḥ.
Rest in meditative equipoise.
Arising in the Yoga of Daily Activities
lar yang rigpa changchub sem
Once again, in post-meditation, awareness-bodhicitta
jetob nyukmé heruka
Arises as the Heruka of the fundamental nature.
chakgya chikpé né sum du
In the form of the single mudrā, his three places
yigé tsenpé namtok sung
Are marked by syllables, giving protection from conceptuality.
benza raksha hung
vajra-rakṣa hūṃ
Thus, stabilize the practice by donning the vajra-armour
And reciting the hundred-syllable mantra.
Dedication and Aspiration Prayers
hung, nang drak rigpa kyilkhor sum gyi ngang
Hūṃ. With appearance, sound and awareness merging in the state of the three maṇḍalas106
sönam yeshe rim nyi naljor tsok
The practice of merit and wisdom of the two phases is perfected.107
mi né yeshe nya ngen depar ngo
I dedicate it to the nirvāṇa of non-abiding wisdom—
kün kyang palchen gopang tobpar shok
May everyone attain the level of the Awesome One!
Recite this three times.
Prayer of Auspiciousness
hum, dömé gönpo rik nga gang chen tso
Hūṃ. In this pure realm of the primordial protector and the five families, Immense Ocean,108
ku nga lhün dzok trulpé shyingkham la
The emanated realm of the spontaneously present five kāyas,
kalzang sangye tong tsa jönpa yi
The thousand buddhas of this fortunate aeon have come.
drönmé kalpa zangpö tashi shok
For this fortunate aeon of light, may all be auspicious!

tongsum mijé dorjé tekpé shying
In the vajrayāna pure realm of this three-thousand-fold universe,
pur drö tenpa jungné orgyen yul
The teachings of the sky-farers originated in Uḍḍiyāna
gangri trö du böpa trisong jé
And were brought to the snowy mountains of Tibet by the kindness of King Trisong;
tukkyé tenpa ta gyé tashi shok
For his teachings to spread far and wide, may all be auspicious!

dzamling sa yi tewa dorjé den
At the centre of this world of Jambudvīpa is the vajra-seat.
pendrub chögyal dzompa chökhor sum
In the Snowy Land of Tibet are the Three Dharma Centres109
do ngak tenpa darwa gangchen jong
Where the Dharma-kings and paṇḍitas convened.
gyalten yündu nepé tashi shok
For the teachings of the Victorious One to remain for long, may all be auspicious!

Samaya! Seal! Seal! Seal!
This treasure originates from the secret scrolls of the ḍākinīs,
who are the masters of the mind direct transmission of the buddhas
and the sign transmission of the vidyādharas, and who are the source of blessings.
It does not contradict the tantras of ground, path and fruition
either in words or meaning.
For gaining accomplishment, it is undeceiving.
It is my, Padma’s, extraordinary teaching.
May it become the Naturally Arisen Vajra’s glory!110
Guhya. The signs dissolve.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2020, based on instructions from Lama Sherab Tharchin of Dodrupchen
Monastery and reference to annotated commentaries by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche and Lopön Thekchok
Yeshe Dorje. Edited by Barry Cohen. With gratitude to Tulku Dawa Zangpo for answering
endless questions, to Josh Capitanio for generously sharing his translation of the Vajrakīla
practice ‘Overpowering the Armies of Māra’ and for thoroughly reviewing the text, and
to Stefan Mang for his suggestions.