A Daily Practice of the Kagyé
by Jamyang Khyentsé Chökyi Lodrö

Taking Refuge and Generating Bodhicitta
lama palchen shyitrö lhar
In the guru, the glorious heruka, embodiment of all peaceful and wrathful deities,
güpé kyab chi sem chok kyé
I devotedly take refuge, and I generate the mind of awakening.
Main Visualization
tongpé ngang lé kechik gi
From the state of emptiness, instantly,
dorjé drak chen pé da nyi
On the great vajra mountain upon a lotus, sun- and moon- disc seat,
jolsong tso gyé chokkyong dang
The eight animal leaders,1 the directional guardians and
lhachen nam kyi den tengdu
The great gods,
rangrig hung ngön barwa lé
My own awareness, the blazing blue syllable hūṃ,
palchen chemchok heruka
Transforms into the great awesome Mahottara Heruka,
ü ting yé kar yön mar shyal
His middle face is blue, right face white, and left face red.
yé sum dorjé yön sum bhen
His three right hands hold vajras and his three left hands hold skull-cups.
pal dang durtrö ché kyi gyen
He is adorned with the heruka and charnel-ground ornaments,
yumchen nam shyal ying chuk khyü
And joined in union with the great consort Dhātvīśvarī Namshalma.
ugyen kunzang rik nga dang
His head is adorned by Samantabhadras of the five families.
ku la pal gü lha nam dzok
In his form the maṇḍalas of the nine herukas are perfected.
tukkar rang dré yeshe sem
In his heart rests his own perfect likeness as the jñānasattva.
dé yi tukkar kuntuzang
In the heart of the jñānasattva is Samantabhadra.
tuk ü dorjé tewa ru
And in Samantabhadra’s heart is a vajra.
nyidé ga'u hung ngönpo
At its centre is a locket of sun and moon containing a blue hūṃ,
sal shying dangpa tak char lé
Lucid, limpid and unchanging.
ngak treng trö shing shyi trö lhé
The mantra-mālā radiates
tukgyü kulwé dön nyi jé
To invoke the wisdom minds of the peaceful and wrathful deities and accomplish twofold benefit.
nöchü palchen kyilkhor shar
And the environment and beings arise as the maṇḍala of the awesome heruka.
om bodhitsitta maha sukha jnana dhatu ah
oṃ bodhicitta-mahā-sukha-jñāna-dhātu āḥ ||
And:
om benza krodha maha shri heruka hung pé maha krodhi shori satvam om rulu rulu hung jo hung
oṃ vajra-krodha-mahā-śrī-heruka hūṃ phaṭ | mahā-krodhīśvarī sattvaṃ | oṃ ru lu ru lu hūṃ byoḥ
hūṃ ||
And:
om benza tsenda sarwa dushten taka hana dahapatsa hung pé
oṃ vajra-caṇḍa-sarva-ḍuṣtāntaka hana daha paca hūṃ phaṭ ||
At the end of the mantra recitation, recite:
nangché lha ku ösal ngang
Within luminosity the perception of the deity dissolves.
lar yang nyukmé chakgyar dang
Then again, I arise in the deity’s genuine form.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Thus bless the practice. Then dedicate, make aspirations, and recite prayers of auspiciousness.

This was composed by Chökyi Lodrö at the request of Sönam Gyaltsen, son of the Lakar family.

| Translated by Stefan Mang, 2019.

Source: 'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bka' brgyad rgyun khyer" in gsung 'bum/_'jam dbyangs
chos kyi blo gros/ (dbu med/). TBRC W21813. 8 vols. gangtok: dzongsar khyentse labrang,
1981-1985. http://tbrc.org/link?RID=W21813 Vol. 3: 225–226
↑ The eight animal leaders (byol song gtso brgyad) are: 1) tiger, 2) lion, 3) leopard, 4) bear,
5) elephant, 6) water buffalo, 7) crocodile, and 8) cobra.