The Single Mudrā
A Daily Practice for the Awesome Ones’ Assembly (Palchen Düpa), the Heart Practice of the Awareness-Holders
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo guru mahāśrīye!
Here, for this practice of The Single Mudrā, A Daily Practice for the Assembly of Awesome Ones,
the Heart Practice of the Awareness-Holders, there are two parts: 1. The Main Part and
2. An Additional Practice.
1. The Main Part
Here there are three parts: 1. The Preliminaries of Gathering the Accumulations; 2. The Main
Part of Generation and Recitation; 3. The Concluding Practices.
1. The Preliminaries of Gathering the Accumulations
Awaken the deities of the field of merit in the sky before you.
lama palchenpo yeshe long gü kyilkhor gyi lhatsok dün gyi namkhar benza samadza
The Guru in the form of the deities of the maṇḍala of Awesome Ones, the expanse of the nine
wisdoms, appears in the sky before me—vajra samāja!
ho, dorjé lobpön sangye pal
Hoḥ. I prostrate to the vajra master,
dü sum shyuk la chaktsal lo
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!
chok sum tenpé shying gyur la
With a mind free from all duality,
nyimé yi kyi kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!
ngöjor yi kyi namtrulpé
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
dakpé chöpa shyé su sol
Both actual and envisioned.
ngödrub chuwo chöpé gek
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of accomplishments,1
nyejé malü shakpar gyi
I confess without exception.
chok chu khor sum dakpé chö
In all those actions throughout the ten directions, done without attachment,
ma chak chö la jé yi rang
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!
dakpa ta shyi drima mé
I awaken the perfect mind set upon awakening,
dzokpé changchub semkyé do
Pure and untainted by the four extremes.
deshek wangchuk semchen la
To the bliss-gone ones,2 mighty lords and sentient beings.3
göpa sum chir lü bul lo
I offer my body for the threefold purpose.4
tserab drangpé lé nam kün
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
dü té changchub chenpor ngo
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
Gather the accumulations by reciting this three times. Afterwards, the field of merit dissolves
into you.
2. The Main Part of Generation and Recitation
Here there are two parts: 1. The Generation of the Deity and 2. The Mantra Recitation.
1. The Generation of the Deity
hung, rangjung rigpa deshyin nyi
Hūṃ. Naturally arisen awareness, suchness devoid of self—
roltsal kün nang nyingjé dang
Its display is all-illuminating, great compassion, whose radiance is
gyu yi hung gi nöchü jang
The causal awareness—hūṃ. It purifies the world and beings.
jungwa rim tsek rirab teng
The elements are assembled one above the other, with Mount Meru at the top.
chirol dorjé sungkhor dang
On the outside is the protection circle of vajras.
drakpö shyalyé tsen dzok ü
The wrathful palace has perfect characteristics. In its centre,
jolsong drekpa pé nyi den
Onto a seat of a beast, a haughty one, a lotus and sun,
dé teng hung bab yong gyur lé
The hūṃ descends and transforms into
dorjé ngönpo tsé ngapa
A blue five-pronged vajra.
dé lé kechik dren dzok su
It transforms completely, perfect the moment I think of it, into
chemchok benza tötreng tsal
Mahottara Mighty Vajra Skull-Garland—5
tingnak u sum chak drukpa
Dark blue in colour, with three heads, six hands,
shyab shyi gyé kyi dortab dré
And four legs spread in champion’s stance,
gyalgong dü shyi chi né dzi
Trampling on the hips of the four Gyalgong demons.
yé kar gö ching shewé shyal
His right face is white, stern and laughing,
yön mar amtsik jikpar tön
His left is red, terrifying, with fangs bared,
ü ting ngam ji trowö shyal
And his central face is blue with a wrathful and majestic expression.
ku chok rik nga u la dzok
The supreme forms of the five families are complete on his crown.
dorjé jakhyung chiwor ding
A vajra garuḍa soars above his head.
chen gu jak dril chewa tsik
He has nine eyes, his tongue curls, and he bares his fangs.
yé kyi dangpo dorjé dang
His first right hand holds a vajra,
barpa khatam tama mé
The middle a khaṭvāṅga, and the last hand fire.
yön gyi dangpo bhenda mar
His first left hand holds a red skull-cup,
barpa tong shol tama na
The middle a plough, and the last
chak kyi dikpa gogu nam
An iron scorpion with nine heads.
durtrö pal gyi ché nam dzok
All the charnel ground accoutrements are complete.
nam shyal yum chok kunzang jor
He is in union with the supreme consort Sky-Faced Lady—6Samantabhadrā.7
yepa tso khyü khatam nam
Her right hand embraces him and holds a khaṭvāṅga,
yönpa chakpé dungmar tob
Her left offers a skull- cup of desire filled with blood.
kudok ngönmo gyen dangden
Her body is blue and adorned with ornaments.
kalpé mepung barwé long
Amidst a blazing expanse of apocalyptic fire,
ga shyi dewa chenpor shyuk
They remain in the great bliss of the four joys.
damtsik yeshe yermé gyur
The samaya and wisdom deities become indivisible.
Recite this and contemplate on it. Then concentrate on the illusory appearance of the deity
for a long time.
2. The Mantra Recitation
Here there are two parts: 1. The Approach and 2. The Accomplishment
1. The Approach
daknyi chemchok yabyum gyi
I am Mahottara in union with his consort.
tuk chok ö kyi drawé long
In my excellent heart, in the expanse of a lattice of light,
saltong zungjuk nyidé teng
Upon a sun and moon—the union of clarity and emptiness—
kunzang yabyum shyal jor la
Is Samantabhadra in union with his consort.
dorjé kyiltrung nyam shyakchen
He sits in cross-legged vajra posture in meditative equipoise.
tukkar deshek kün gyi sok
At his heart is the life-force of all the bliss-gone ones—
yigé dru sum tsek mar sal
The three syllables, assembled one above the other, clearly visualised.
dé lé ö trö nangsi kün
They radiate light, and all of appearance and existence
yeshe nga ru sangye gyur
Awakens as the five primordial wisdoms.
With the view that sees the single taste of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, recite the following either
mentally or softly.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
2. The Accomplishment
yeshe gyalpo tang chal gyi
In the heart of the wisdom king and queen in union,8
tukkar pema nyidé teng
Upon a lotus, sun and moon,
ser gyi dorjé ra gupé
Is a golden vajra with nine prongs.
ü rar tingdzin sempa hung
In the central prong is the concentration being9 hūṃ.
ra gyé dün né rimpa shyin
In the eight prongs, beginning with the front, are
tokta nyi dang drongkhyer druk
The first, the six cities, and the last.10
kün kyang tukké hung la ta
All of them face the hūṃ in the centre,
shintu tra shying özer bar
And are extremely subtle and ablaze with light rays.
om guru shri benza yaksha krodha tsitta hung
oṃ guru śrī vajrayakṣa krodha citta hūṃ

lha la sal nang tönpa dang
Enhancing the clear appearance of the deity and
trodü zer la dé khagyur
The nail of radiating and absorbing are done alternately.
rang rang ngak kyi yikdru lé
From the seed syllables of the mantra,
ngak treng lugu gyü du tön
A string of mantras is emitted.
yab né yum gyi shyal du shyuk
It exits the male deity and enters the mouth of the female deity.
ku yi yib gyü kha sang né
It flows through the from of her body and from her secret space,
dorjé norbü lam shyuk té
Enters the path of the vajra-jewel,
tuk sok hung la tim shying khor
And dissolves into the life-force hūṃ at the heart.
dewa chenpö özer gyi
Circling with light rays of great bliss,
gyalwa chö ching ngödrub yik
Offerings are made to the victorious ones and all the jewel-like accomplishments
tamché dü né rang la tim
Gather and dissolve into oneself.
lar trö drowé lé nyön jang
Once again light radiates, purifying the karma and emotions of beings.
Focus on the visualization and perform the recitation. If you wish to elaborate, you could also
practise the hūṃ recitation.
3. The Concluding Practices
The Dissolution and Re-emergence
ten dang tenpé nangcha kün
The entire appearance of the palace and the deity
ösal dömé shi su tim
Dissolves in the natural state of primordial luminosity.
lar yang zungjuk gyumé kü
Once again, I arise in the illusory body of union,
né sum dorjé dru sum tsen
Marked at my three places with the three vajra syllables.
benza raksha hung
vajra-rakṣa hūṃ
Dedication
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
heruka pal drub gyur né
Attain the realization of the Awesome Heruka, and thereby
drowa chik kyang malüpa
Every single sentient being
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Reach his state of perfection too.
Conclude with the dedication, and prayers of aspiration and auspiciousness, and engage in daily
activities.11
2. An Additional Practice
In addition, should you wish to elaborate a little, you could meditate on all the deities arranged
in the body maṇḍala. Proceed as before, from gathering the accumulations up to and
including:
ga shyi dewa chenpor shyuk
They remain in the great bliss of the four joys.
Then:
palchen yabyum jortsam né
From the point of union of the Awesome One and consort
tingnak hung gi yigé trö
Radiate dark blue hūṃ syllables
dorjé ku yi né nam su
To the places in the vajra body.
traktung yabyum sé ché kyé
They give birth to the herukas with their consorts and sons.
hum hum hum hum hum hum hum hum
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
hung chen ngak kyi dra drakpé
Through the resounding of the great hūṃ mantra
trogyal kyilkhor lhün gyi drub
The maṇḍala of wrathful kings is spontaneously present.
kalpé mé tar bar long né
Within the expanse that blazes like apocalyptic fire,
rangjung yeshe tro tsok shar
Naturally arising, primordial wisdom appears as the gathering of wrathful ones.

chiwor jampal shinjé ser
At your head is Mañjuśrī Yamāntaka, yellow in colour.
bechön yé la dikdzub yön
His right hand holds a club, his left hand in the threatening mudrā.
drinpar wangchen tamdrin mar
At your throat is mighty Hayagrīva, red in colour.
raldri yé la pema yön
His right hand holds a sword, his left a lotus.
tukkar benza héru ting
At your heart is Vajra Heruka,12 blue in colour.
dorjé yé la dungtrak yön
His right hand holds a vajra, his left a skull-cup filled with blood.
tewar dorjé shyönnu jang
At your navel is Vajrakīlaya, green in colour.
chak nyi dorjé purbu dril
His two hands brandishing a dagger.
sangwar lamé heruka
At your secret place is Unsurpassable Heruka.13
tingnak jakhyung shying yuk tok
Dark blue in colour, he holds a garuḍa and corpse-mace.
chitsuk rigdzin dorjé kar
At your crown is Vajra Vidyādhara, white in colour.
tö yuk yé la drilbu yön
His right hand holds a skull-mace, his left a bell.
la yé drekpa kün dul ting
At your right thigh is Tamer of the Arrogant, blue in colour.14
towa yé la dungtung yön
His right hand holds a hammer, his left a short spear.
la yön tobden nakpo ché
At your left thigh is Mighty Black One.
chakkyu yé la trul shyak yön
His right hand holds an iron hook, his left a snake-lasso.

kün kyang rik shyi khor dangché
All of them possess a retinue of the four families.
shyab kyi lhachen pomo dzi
With their feet they trample upon the great male and female gods.15
chönyi mingyur yum nam ting
To symbolize unchanging reality the female deities are blue.
driguk tö dzin yab la khyü
They hold a curved knife and a skull-cup, and embrace their male consorts.
yenlak gowa rik shyi ni
At your limbs are the gatekeepers of the four families.
chakkyu shyakpa chakdrok dril
They hold, respectively, an iron-hook, lasso, iron shackles and bell.
tsombu gu yi tso chok lé
These nine groups of maṇḍala deities,
düngya nyerngé lhatsok kün
All seven hundred and twenty-five,
nyi lé özer shyindu shar
Arise like the rays of the sun.
kudok chaktsen gyencha luk
The colour of their bodies, implements and ornaments are all distinct,
ma dré yongdzok chenpor sal
Yet clearly visualized as the great completeness.
damtsik yeshe yermé gyur
The samaya and wisdom deities become indivisible.
Awaken the innate deities who abide primordially in the vajra body through the condition of
the mantra, clearly visualize the main deity with face and arms perfectly complete, and on
an aspirational level generate a visualization of the retinue.
Perform the recitation of the approach and accomplishment as above. If you wish to elaborate
with the all-embodying mantra of the wrathful ones, visualize the mantra-garland firebrand
in each of the deities residing in the places of your body.
lhatsok kün kyang chi dril ngak
All deities of the gathering proclaim the all-embodying mantra,16
urchem druk gi dra shyin drok
With a terrible roar and rumbling.
ngaden ö kyi tongsum gang
Five-coloured light fills the three thousand-fold cosmos, through which
nedön shyi shying tsé pal gyé
Diseases and evil spirits are pacified, lifespan and glory increase,
kham sum wang dü mikja dral
The three realms are magnetized, and beings liberated.
rigdzin shyi yi né tob gyur
And we all attain the four levels of an awareness-holder.
Recite this and focus on the visualization.
om benza tsenda sarva dushtam takahana dahapatsa hung pé
oṁ vajracaṇḍa-sarvaḍuṣtāntaka hana daha paca hūṁ phaṭ
Recite as much as you can. At the end, perform the dissolution as usual.
The first practice is a daily practice for beginners who have not yet done the approach and
accomplishment [on retreat]. For those who have completed the approach and accomplishment,
and have attained clarity and stability in the generation phase of the main practice, it
would be excellent if they were to follow the approach of the body maṇḍala.

The Subject who Delights the Omniscient Guru (Kunkhyen Lama Gyepe Bang) combined the wisdom
intent of the main treasure text with the time-honoured tradition of the tantra sections and
wrote this down. Virtue! Sarva maṅgalam!

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Barry Cohen, 2020, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
With thanks to Sean Price for generously sharing his translation of the first section and
Matthias Staber for his suggestions. The eight-branch offering was translated by Adam Pearcey.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "dpal chen 'dus pa'i rgyun khyer phyag rgya gcig pa/" in gsung
'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980.
Vol. 16: 17–21
↑ Skt. siddhi.↑ Skt. sugata.↑ Jigme Lingpa explains in his commentary on ‘The Eight-Branch Offering
from the Tantra System Vajrakīla’ that the sugatas referred to here are the buddhas
of the past; the mighty lords are the gurus, the buddhas of the present; and sentient beings
are the buddhas of the future, since they all possess the buddha-nature or sugatagarbha.↑
Jigme Lingpa explains that one offers to the buddhas of the past in order to bring about
the actualization of their inexhaustible qualities of the body, speech, mind, qualities
and activities; one offers to the buddhas of the present in order to become a suitable vessel
for the perfect wisdom of all the tathāgatas and to attain fruition through their empowerment
and blessings; and one offers to the buddhas of the future in order to create the
auspicious circumstances for attaining the fruition of the great vehicle and fully perfecting
the benefit of others.↑ Tib. badzra thod phreng rtsal (pron. Benza Tötreng Tsal).↑ Tib.
gnam zhal ma (pron. Namshyalma).↑ The consort of Samantabhadra is often back translated
into Sanskrit as Samantabhadrī, but Samantabhadrā is better attested in Sanskrit sources.↑
I.e., Samantabhadra with consort.↑ Skt. samādhisattva.↑ This means the first syllable of
the mantra—oṃ—then guru, śrī, vajra, yakṣa, krodha, and citta, and the last syllable—hūṃ—.↑
Reading spyod lam here for sbyor lam.↑ I.e., Yangdak.↑ I.e. Mamo Bötong.↑ I.e., Drekpa
Kündul, the chief deity of the Jikten Chötö maṇḍala.↑ The Mahādevas.↑ oṁ vajracaṇḍa...etc