The Essential Activity Manual for the Awesome Ones’ Assembly, the Heart Practice of Vidyādharas,
from the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo guru mahā śrī herukāya
Here is presented the Essential Activity Manual of the Awesome Ones' Assembly, the Heart Practice
of the Vidyādharas. The means of putting this into practice has thirteen parts:
1. Gathering the Accumulations, 2. Establishing the Boundary, 3. Blessing the Offerings,
4. Generating the Deity, 5. Granting the Empowerment, 6. Inviting the Wisdom Deities, 7. Requesting
Them to Remain,
8. Paying Homage, 9. Making Offerings, 10. Offering Praise
11. Mantra recitation, 12. The Feast-gathering, and 13. The Conclusion.
1. Gathering the Accumulations
lama palchenpo yeshe long gü kyilkhor gyi lhatsok dün gyi namkhar benza samadza
Deities of the maṇḍala of the nine expanses of wisdom, guru Awesome Ones, I invite you in the
sky in front—vajra-samājaḥ!
In this way, invite the field of accumulation, which fills the whole of space, into the sky
before you.
ho, dorjé lobpön sangye pal
Hoḥ. I prostrate to the vajra master,
dü sum shyuk la chaktsal lo
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!
chok sum tenpé shying gyur la
With a mind free from all duality,
nyimé yi kyi kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!
ngöjor yi kyi namtrulpé
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
dakpé chöpa shyé su sol
Both actual and envisioned.
ngödrub chuwo chöpé gek
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of accomplishments,1
nyejé malü shakpar gyi
I confess without exception.
chok chu khor sum dakpé chö
In all those actions throughout the ten directions done without attachment
ma chak chö la jeyirang
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!
dakpa ta shyi drima mé
I awaken the perfect mind set upon awakening,
dzokpé changchub semkyé do
Pure and untainted by the four extremes.
deshek wangchuk semchen la
To the bliss-gone ones,2 mighty lords and sentient beings.3
göpa sum chir lü bul lo
I offer my body for the threefold purpose.4
tserab drangpé lé nam kün
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
dü té changchub chenpor ngo
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
Recite this three times. Then:
tsok shying nam rang la timpar gyur
I consider that the field of accumulation dissolves into me.
2. Establishing the Boundary
rangnyi kechik gi dorjé heruka kudok ngönpo dorjé dang dungtrak dzinpé kur gyurpar gyur
Instantly I imagine that I transform into the form of the vajra heruka, blue in colour and holding
a skull-cup filled with blood.
hung, daknyi shyedang dorjé yi
Hūṃ. I am Vajra Wrath.
chen mik nyidar bar shying sek
My sun and moon eyes burn and blaze.
tuk lé trowö tsatsa tro
My heart emits wrathful deities like sparks.
tongsum trulpé mé yi geng
The billionfold universe is filled with emanating fire,
choktsam tsöncha cholpé tam
And all directions are filled with a frenzy of weapons.
dakmé tongpar tsam ché do
Within selflessness and emptiness, I set the boundary!
om surya tsenda benza krota dzola ram ram tsakrawatti maha krota sarva dushtam a hum pé
oṃ sūrya-candra vajra-krodha jvala raṃ raṃ cakravarti mahā-krodha sarva-duṣṭān e hūṃ phaṭ
Recite this and visualize that hosts of wrathful deities, masses of fire and weapons all mingle,
forming an indestructible and immovable circle of protection.
3. Blessing the Offerings
hung, ying né yeshe dru sum char du bab
Hūṃ. From basic space the three wisdom syllables descend like rain,
chödzé nyekyön ma dak sek tor trü
Burning, scattering, and washing away any faults and impurities in the offering substances.
droom lé rinchen a lé bhendé nang
From bhrūṃ arises a jewelled vessel and from a arises a skull-cup
chi nang sang sum chötrin gyatsor gyur
That contains oceans of outer, inner, and secret offering clouds.
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé dipam ghandhé rupa shapta ghandhé rasa saparshé sarva putsa
ah hum
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe dīpaṃ gandhe rūpa śabda gandhe rāsa sparśa sarva-pūja āḥ
hūṃ
These are the sensual delights of the regular offerings. Then:
om ah hung sarva pentsa amrita hung hrih ta
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva-pañcāmṛta hūṃ hrīḥ thaḥ
om ah hung maha balingta tedzo balingta bala bati guhya samaye soha
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā-baliṅte teja-baliṅte balapati guhya-samaye svāhā
om ah hung maha rakta samanta mandala hung pé
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā-rakta samanta-maṇḍala hūṃ phaṭ
By repeating these mantras three times, bless the medicine, torma and rakta.
4. Generating the Deity
From within luminous suchness, naturally arisen awareness,
Arises all-illuminating great compassion, beyond reference. Its natural radiance
Is the causal meditative concentration,5 a dark blue hūṃ, whose light purifies the environment
and all beings into emptiness. From it arises a vajra marked with hūṃ.
It transforms, in the sky, into the causal heruka, dark blue in colour and holding a vajra and
a skull-cup filled with blood.
From his heart, syllables emanate and gather back, giving rise to the stacked elements, Mount
Meru and the palace. In its centre, the causal heruka descends.
He transforms and arises as the resultant heruka.
The retinue emanates in the manner of taking birth from a womb. Recite the following while actualizing
the visualization.
hung, rangjung rigpa dakmé deshyin nyi
Hūṃ. Naturally-arisen awareness, suchness devoid of self—
roltsal kün nang nyingjé chenpö dang
Its display is all-illuminating, great compassion, whose radiance is
gyu yi rigpa hung gi nöchü jang
The causal awareness—hūṃ. It purifies the world and beings
denyi negyur dorjé tsé ngapa
And then transforms into a five-pronged vajra.
kechik yong gyur gyu yi heruka
Instantly, it converts into the causal heruka,
jömé long nga yum gyi kha la shar
Who arises in the sky of the mother—the inexpressible five expanses.
tuk lé é yam ra sum kem ram ché
From his heart unfold e, yaṃ, ra, suṃ, keṃ and raṃ.
é lé namkha yam lé yo jé lung
From e comes space, from yaṃ the whirling wind.
ra lé rakta sum lé shying chen shyi
From ra comes rakta, from suṃ the ground of human skin.
kem lé rüpé rirab bang rimchen
From keṃ a terraced mountain of bones.
ram lé kalmé rab bar ngam ji long
From raṃ the magnificent expanse of blazing apocalyptic fire.
hung lé namchak dorjé drak chen teng
From hūṃ a massive vajra of meteoric iron, and above that,
namkhé ying né droom yik ngaden bab
From the expanse of the sky, a five-coloured bhrūṃ descends.
droom ratna bhendza jnana tsakra mandala bhrum
bhrūṃ ratna bhanda jñāna cakra maṇḍala bhrūṃ
droom yik né gyur trulpé shyalmé khang
The syllable bhrūṃ transforms into the emanated palace.
chi ni rinchen nang ni töpé khar
The outside of the palace is made of jewels, the inside of skulls.
dru shyi go shyi tsé dang tsennyi den
It has four corners and four doors, and possesses all the proper qualities and characteristics.
guna tara tabab bang rim gyé
It has a guṇa-toraṇa6 archway with eight levels,
chökhor ridak duk dang norbü tok
Dharma-wheels, deer, parasols, and a jewel top-ornament.
chirol rinchen tsikpé ming gi shyi
On the outside, the foundations of the walls are made of jewels.
dönam marpor lhamo chudruk khö
On the red offering-ledges are the sixteen goddesses.
pagu serpo drawa draché dzé
The palace is adorned with yellow bricks and latticework.
sharbu dayab khang tsek dorjé tok
It has rain spouts and parapets, and the upper stories have vajra-ornaments.
nang ni durtrö rolpé shyalmé khang
The inside of the palace appears as a charnel ground.
chi khor ro ling gyé dang dorjé gur
On the outside it is surrounded by the eight charnel grounds and the vajra tent.
kalmé urur chemchem barwé long
Within the expanse of blazing apocalyptic fire, roaring and flashing,
womin sang chen rolpé podrang ché
Is the magnificent palace of the Unsurpassed7 realm ‘Display of the Great Secret’,
rab jik namchak tsatra tsib gyé ü
Utterly terrifying. In the centre of an eight-spoked wheel made of meteoric iron
dechen kuntuzangmö é long du
Is e, the expanse of great bliss—Samantabhadrā.8
jolsong tso nam drekpa chegu dzi
Within it, the beasts trample the nine great haughty ones.
ma chak pema tabshé nyida bar
On a lotus of non-attachment blaze the seats of sun and moon—method and insight.
rudra kroti tira bam
rudra krodhi tira baṃ
pam pema mandala
paṃ padma-maṇḍala
ma surya mandala
ma sūrya-maṇḍala
a tsenda mandala
a candra-maṇḍala
hung, rangjung gyu yi heruka
Hūṃ. The naturally-arisen causal herukas9
yeshe ying né den la bab
Descend from the space of primordial wisdom and are seated.
nyamjor dewa chenpö dré
With the sound of the great bliss of union,
pakpa chö ching shyendön jé
Offerings are made to the nobles ones and others’ benefit accomplished.
yong gyur drebü heruka
They transform into the resultant herukas,
chemchok benza tötreng tsal
Mahottara Mighty Skull-Garlanded Vajra—10
tingnak u sum chak drukpa
Dark blue in colour, with three heads, six hands,
shyab shyi gyé kyi dortab dré
And four legs in champion’s stance,
gyalgong dü shyi yi né dzi
Trampling on the heads of the four gyalgong demons.11
yé kar gö ching shewé shyal
His right face is white, stern and laughing.
yön mar am tsik jikpar tön
His left is red and terrifying, with fangs bared,
ü ting ngam ji trowö shyal
And his central face is blue with a wrathful and majestic expression.
ku chok rik nga u la dzok
The supreme forms of the five families are complete on his crown.
dorjé jakhyung chiwor ding
A vajra-garuḍa soars above his head.
chen gu jak dril chewa tsik
He has nine eyes, his tongue curls, and he bares his fangs.
yé kyi dangpo dorjé dang
His first right hand holds a vajra,
barpa khatam tama mé
The middle a khaṭvāṅga and the last hand holds fire.
yön gyi dangpo bhenda mar
His first left hand holds a red skull-cup,12
barpa tongshol tama na
The middle a plough, and the last
chak kyi dikpa gogu nam
An iron scorpion with nine heads.
durtrö pal gyi ché nam dzok
All the charnel ground accoutrements are complete.

nam shyal yum chok kunzang jor
He is in union with the supreme consort Sky-Faced Lady—13Samantabhadrā.
yepé tso khyü khatam nam
Her right hand embraces him and holds a khaṭvāṅga,
yönpa chakpé dungmar tob
Her left offers a red skull-cup of desire filled with blood.
kudok ngönmo gyen dangden
Her body is blue and bedecked with ornaments.
kalpé mepung barwé long
Amidst a blazing expanse of apocalyptic fire,
ga shyi dewa chenpor shyuk
They remain in the great bliss of the four joys.

palchen yabyum jortsam né
From the point of union of the Awesome One and consort
chok shyi tsam shyi tsib teng su
Dark blue hūṃ syllables radiate
tingnak hung gi yigé trö
To the spokes in the four cardinal and four intermediate directions
traktung yabyum sé ché kyé
And generate the herukas with their consorts and sons.
hum hum hum hum hum hum hum hum
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
hung chen ngak kyi dra drakpé
Through the resounding of the great hūṃ mantra
trogyal kyilkhor lhün gyi drub
The maṇḍala of wrathful kings is spontaneously present.
kalpé mé tar bar long né
Within the expanse blazing like apocalyptic fire,
rangjung yeshe tro tsok shar
Naturally arising, primordial wisdom appears as the gathering of wrathful ones.

shar du benza héru ting
In the East is Vajra-Heruka,14 blue in colour.
dorjé yé la dungtrak yön
His right hand holds a vajra, his left a skull-cup filled with blood.
benza kroti shori jor
He is in union with Vajra-Krodhiśvarī.

lho ru jampal shinjé ser
In the south is Mañjuśrī-Yamāntaka, yellow in colour.
bechön yé la dikdzub yön
His right hand holds a club, his left hand in the threatening mudrā.
beta zajé nakmo yum
His consort is the black devourer Vetālī.

nub tu wangchen tamdrin mar
In the West is mighty Hayagrīva, red in colour.
raldri yé la pema yön
His right hand holds a sword, his left a lotus.
pema ziden trogyal yum
His consort is the wrathful queen Splendid Lotus.

jang du dorjé shyönnu jang
In the North is Vajrakīla, green in colour.
chak nyi dorjé purbu dril
His two hands brandish a dagger.
khorwa gyendeb pal gyi yum
His awesome consort is Dīptacakrā.

sharlhor lamé heruka
In the south-east is Unsurpassable Heruka.15
tingnak jakhyung shying yuk tok
Dark blue in colour, he holds a garuḍa and corpse-mace.
yumchen nyi shyi demchokma
His great consort is Supreme Peace and Bliss.
ma nga lasok khor dangché
His retinue are the Five Mothers16 and others.

lhonub rigdzin dorjé kar
In the south-west is Vajra-Vidyādhara, white in colour.
tö yuk yé la drilbu yön
His right hand holds a skull-mace, his left a bell.
dechen dorjé naljor yum
His consort is Vajrayoginī, enjoying great bliss.

nubjang drekpa kün dul ting
In the north-west is Tamer of the Arrogant, blue in colour.17
towa yé la dungtung yön
His right hand holds a hammer, his left a short spear.
kham sum sipa chi dul yum
His consort is Universal Tamer of the Three Realms of Existence.

jangshar tobden nakpo ché
In the north-east is Mighty Black One.18
chakkyu yé la drul shyak yön
His right hand holds an iron hook, his left a snake-lasso.
jungwa nga yi dakmo yum
His consort is Lady of the Five Elements.
zuk kham khar dek dökham nön
She raises the form realm aloft and suppresses the desire realm.

kün kyang rik shyi khor dangché
All of them possess a retinue of the four families.
shyab kyi lhachen pomo dzi
With their feet they trample upon the great male and female gods.19
chönyi mingyur yum nam ting
To symbolize unchanging reality, the female deities are blue.
driguk tö dzin yab la khyü
They hold a curved knife and skull-cup, and embrace their male consorts.
chirol gowa rik shyi ni
On the outside are the gatekeepers of the four families.
chakkyu shyakpa chakdrok dril
They hold, respectively, an iron hook, lasso, iron shackles and bell.
tsombu gu yi kyilkhor la
These nine groups of maṇḍala deities,
düngya nyerngé lhatsok kün
All seven hundred and twenty-five,
nyi lé özer shyindu shar
Arise like rays from the sun.
kudok chaktsen gyencha luk
The colour of their bodies, implements and ornaments are all distinct,
ma dré yongdzok chenpor sal
Yet clearly visualized as the great completeness.
Visualize this clearly.
5. Granting the Empowerment
hung, rang lé sharwé palchen tsok
Hūṃ. The gathering of Awesome Ones arises from oneself.
tutsal yongsu dzokjé chir
In order to perfect power and strength,
ku sung tuk su jinlab shing
Bless my ordinary body, speech and mind into the enlightened body, speech and mind,
yeshe nga yi wangkur ro
And grant the empowerment of the five primordial wisdoms.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
om hung sa hrih ah
oṃ hūṃ svā hrīḥ āḥ
6. Inviting the Wisdom Deities
rang gi dünpa sempa dang
Through your intention and the great display of light at your heart
nyinggé ö kyi rolpa chenpö chok chü deshyin shekpa tamché namkha gangwé kyilkhor gyi khorlor
benza samadza
All the thus-gone ones of the ten directions fill the sky. The wheel of the maṇḍala—vajra-samājaḥ!
hum, womin chöying dechen shyingkham né
Hūṃ. From the Unsurpassed, the space of reality, the pure realm of great bliss,
lhündrub rolpa yeshe long gü gar
Arises the spontaneously present display, the dance of the nine expanses of wisdom.20
shyitro rabjam palchen kagyé lha
Infinite peaceful and wrathful deities, Eight Awesome Herukas—21
dukpa dul chir né dir shek su sol
In order to tame the wicked, please come to this place!
éhyahi dza hung bam ho
ehy ehi jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
samaya hring hring dza dza
samaya hrīṃ hrīṃ jaḥ jaḥ
7. Requesting Them to Remain
hung, madak nangwa dakpa rabjam kyi
Hūṃ. Impure appearances arise as the infinite purity of
ten dang tenpé khorlor yong sharwa
The wheel of the palace and the deities.22
tingdzin trulpé shying chok nyamgawar
In the supreme realm of joy emanated from samādhi,
damyé nyimé ngowor tenpar shyuk
May the indivisible nature of the samaya and wisdom deities remain firmly!
samaya abesha ya tishta lhen
samayāveśaya tiṣṭha lhan
8. Paying Homage
hung, rangjung rangshar trulpé kyilkhor la
Hūṃ. In the self-existent, naturally arisen, emanated maṇḍala,
zang ngen nyidzin küntok namdak kyang
Dualistic thoughts of good and bad are utterly pure.
rangrig chökur jalwé da chak gar
Yet still, within the dharmakāya of natural awareness, I display the symbolic homage,
panglang mepé ngang né tsalwar gyi
And free from adopting and abandoning, I prostrate!
atipu ho
atipu hoḥ
nama yami
nama yāmiḥ
9. Making Offerings
hung, lamé chok gi chöpa dampa ni
Hūṃ. The unsurpassable, supreme, authentic offerings
yeshe nga yi özer nampar tro
Manifest from the five wisdoms in the form of light rays,
döpé yönten nga yi rab gyen té
Adorned with the five sensual delights.
damtsik shyin lé chi der shyé su sol
In accord with your samaya, accept them as you please.
maha sukha pudza ho | maha jnana té té hung | té na té té hung
mahā-sukha pūja hoḥ | mahā-jñāna te te hūṃ | tena te te hūṃ
om shri benza sapariwara dhupé hung | pupé tram | aloké hrih | gendhé ho | naiwidyé ah | shabda
hung | sarva pudza samaya ho
oṃ śrī-vajra-saparivāra dhūpe hūṃ | puṣpe trāṃ | āloke hrīḥ | gandhe hoḥ | naivedye āḥ | śabda
hūṃ | sarvapūjā samaya hoḥ
hala pentsa pudza ho
hala pañca-pūja hoḥ
om ah hung sarva pentsa amrita hung hrih ta | maha balingta khahi | maha rakta khahi | maha
benza amrita dzagé pudza ho
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva-pañcāmṛta hūṃ hrīḥ ṭhaḥ | mahā-baliṅte khāhi | mahā-rakta khāhi | mahā-vajrāmṛta-jagad
pūja hoḥ
dza hung bam ho | tana gana pudza ho
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ | tana-gana pūja hoḥ
10. Offering Praise
hung, mi duk sinpö ku ni gek ching pa
Hūṃ. Your form of an ugly rākṣasa is captivating and heroic,
drakshul dorjé gemo shewé dra
Your vajra laughter is menacing and you make ferocious and stern sounds,
chok tu shyiwé tuk ni nyingjé ngam
Your supremely peaceful mind is compassionate and awesome;
gar gü sa sum namnön khyö la tö
With your nine demeanours you suppress the three realms—you I praise!

chönyi chik la yeshe long gü tsal
Reality is singular, yet its radiance is the nine expanses of wisdom.23
duljé kham la jé chak trowö nyam
According to the capacity of students, you appear joyful, desirous or angry.
rolpé chotrul mi zé barwé ku
Your form is a magical display that blazes unbearably—
düngya nyerngé kyilkhor lha la tö
To the seven hundred and twenty-five deities of the maṇḍala, I pay homage!
As you thus perform the praise, single-pointedly keep in mind the clear appearance and pride
of the generation phase, and train in remembering the purity.
11. Mantra recitation
There are three parts: 1. Approach, 2. Accomplishment and 3. Activity.
1. The Peaceful Approach
daknyi chemchok yabyum gyi
I am Mahottara in union with the consort.
tuk chok ö kyi drawé long
In my excellent heart, amidst an expanse of latticed light,
saltong zungjuk nyidé teng
Upon a sun and moon—the union of clarity and emptiness—
kunzang yabyum shyal jor la
Is Samantabhadra in union with his consort.
dorjé kyiltrung nyam shyakchen
He sits in cross-legged vajra posture in meditative equipoise.
tukkar deshek kün gyi sok
At his heart is the life-force of all the bliss-gone ones—
yigé dru sum tsek mar sal
The three syllables, assembled one above the other, clearly visualised.
dé lé ö trö nangsi kün
They radiate light, and I consider that all of appearance and existence
yeshe nga ru sangye gyur
Awakens as the five primordial wisdoms.
With the view that sees the single taste of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Recite this mentally or as a whisper. The total number of mantras for the approach phase is
thirty million.
2. The Wrathful Accomplishment
yeshe gyalpo tangchal gyi
In the heart of the wisdom king and queen in union,24
tukkar pema nyidé teng
Upon a lotus, sun and moon,
ser gyi dorjé ra gupé
Is a golden vajra with nine prongs.
ü rar tingdzin sempa hung
In the central prong is the concentration-being25 hūṃ.
ra gyé dün né rimpa shyin
In the eight prongs, beginning with the front, are
tokta nyi dang drongkhyer druk
The first, the six cities, and the last.26
kün kyang tukké hung la ta
All of them are turned toward the hūṃ in the centre,
shintu tra shying özer bar
Extremely subtle and blazing with light rays.
om guru shri benza yaksha krodha tsitta hung
oṃ guru-śrī-vajra-yakṣa-krodha-citta hūṃ
Enhancing the clear appearance of the deity and
The nail of radiating and absorbing are done alternately.
rang rang ngak kyi yig dru lé
From the seed syllables of the mantra,
ngak treng lugu gyü du tön
A string of mantra-garlands emanates.
yab né yum gyi shyal du shyuk
It exits the male deity and enters the mouth of the female deity.
ku yi yib gyü kha sang né
It flows through the form of her body and from her secret space,
dorjé norbü lam shyuk té
Entering the path of the vajra-jewel.
tuk sok hung la tim shying khor
It dissolves into the life-force hūṃ at the heart and revolves.
dewa chenpö özer gyi
The light rays of great bliss
gyalwa chö ching ngödrub yik
Make offerings to the victorious ones and gather all the jewel-like accomplishments,
tamché dü né rang la tim
Which then dissolve into me.
lar trö drowé lé nyön jang
Once again light radiates, purifying the karma and emotions of beings.
With one-pointed focus, mostly recite the root mantra with thirteen syllables. At times, also
recite hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ, the innermost essence of the profound heart practice.
If you wish to repeat the all-embodying mantra, adopt the palanquin recitation and:
lhatsok kün kyang chi dril ngak
The whole assembly of deities resounds with the all-embodying mantra,27
ur chem druk gi dra shyin drok
With a roaring and rumbling sound.
ngaden ö kyi tongsum gang
Five-coloured light fills the three thousand-fold cosmos, through which
nedön shyi shying tsé pal gyé
Diseases and evil spirits are pacified, lifespan and glory increase,
kham sum wang dü mikja dral
The three realms are magnetized, and beings liberated.
rigdzin shyi yi né tob gyur
Consider that you attain the four levels of an awareness-holder.
While visualizing like this, recite:
om benza tsenda sarva dushtam takahana dahapatsa hung pé
oṁ vajra-caṇḍa-sarva-ḍuṣtāntaka hana daha paca hūṁ phaṭ
Furthermore it is said that, regarding the main mantra,28 you are allowed to perform the activities
if you recite the mantra 100,000 times multiplied by the amount of syllables of the
mantra.29
Otherwise, multiply that by four. (This relates to matured practitioners)30
The all-embodying mantra31 should be recited a tenth part of that.
3. Application of Activities
Having completed the approach and accomplishment, if you wish to perform the recitation for
the application of activities separately you must follow the main text. In any case, when
you finish the recitation, recite the vowels and consonants, the mantra of interdependent
origination and the hundred-syllable mantra, which will amend duplications and omissions and
increase the power of the mantra recitation. Also recite ‘the praise that is recited after
every thousand mantras’.
12. The Feast-gathering
At the end of the session, if you wish to perform a concise feast-offering, arrange appropriate
samaya substances of food and drink—method and insight. Purify and bless them with ambrosia.
The Blessing
hung, palchen tuk lé ram yam kham
Hūṃ. From the heart of Awesome One radiate raṃ, yaṃ, and khaṃ,
tröpé tsok kyi ngödzin jang
Purifying grasping at the feast-offerings as real.
nangsi dechen kapalar
Within the kapāla of the great bliss of appearance and existence,
chü nam rik ngé damdzé gyur
The essences become the samaya substances of the five families.
om ah hung ha ho hrih
oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
The Invitation
hung, womin chöying podrang dang
Hūṃ. From the Unsurpassed, the palace of basic space,
yenlak dünden longchö dzok
The saṃbhogakāya endowed with the seven branches
rangshyin tulkü shyingkham né
And the pure realm of the nature-nirmāṇakāya,32
palchen kyilkhor lhatsok dang
We invite the host of deities of the Awesome One’s maṇḍala.

neyul durtrö gyé nam na
All who reside in the sacred lands and the eight charnel grounds—
shyukpé pawo khandro dang
Heroes33 and ḍākinīs,
shukdro naljor shyingkyong nam
Energetic Spirits,34 yogis, and protectors of the realms—
tsok la chendren shek su sol
I invite you to this feast-gathering, please come!
guru dewa daka dakini dharmapala samaya dza
guru-deva-ḍākinī-dharmapāla-samaya jaḥ
The First Portion
hung, sangye damtsik lanamé
Hūṃ. The samaya of the buddhas is unsurpassed.
chi nang sangwa mejung tsok
I offer marvellous outer, inner and secret offerings
kyilkhor lha la chöpar bul
To the deities of the maṇḍala!
shyé né wang dang ngödrub tsol
Having accepted them, grant us empowerment and accomplishments!
gana tsakra pudza ho
gaṇacakra-pūja hoḥ
The Intermediate Offering of Confession
The intermediate section of confession and the final section of the offering of liberation can
be done according to the main text, or else, in a concise way, as follows:
hung, dak gi tserab tokmé né
Hūṃ. In all my lives without beginning,
sang ngak tekchen gor shyuk té
Since I have entered the Great Vehicle of Secret Mantra,
tsawa yenlak damnyam pa
Whatever impairments of the root and branch samayas I have committed,
döyön tsok kyi chöpé shak
Through offering this feast-offering of sensory delights, I confess them all.
Recite the hundred-syllable heruka mantra.
om heruka sato samaya | manupalaya | heruka sato tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava | sutokhayo mé
bhava | supokhayo mé bhava | anurakto mé bhava | sarva siddhi mé prayaccha | sarva karma
su tsa mé | tsittam shreyang | kuru hung | ha ha ha ha ho | bhagavan | sarva tatagata heruka
ma mé muntsa heruka bhava maha samaya sato ah
oṃ herukasatvasamayam anupālaya herukasatva tvenopatiṣṭha ḍṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo
me bhava anurakto me bhava sarvasiddhiṃ me prayaccha sarvakarmasu ca me cittaṃ śreyaḥ
kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavan sarvatathāgataheruka mā me muñca heruka bhava mahāsamayasattva
āḥ
The Liberation
hung, marik lé nyön zungdzin gyi
Hūṃ! Ignorance, karma, negative emotions and dualistic grasping,
kyepé dakdzin rudra kün
And their creation, all these ego-clinging rudras—
zuk la pob chik nri tri dza
Summon them into this form: ṇṛ ṭṛ jaḥ.35
namshé chöying long du pé
Their consciousness liberated into the expanse of all-pervading space—phaṭ!
zukpung tsok kyi khorlor rol
And their body enjoyed as the feast-offering.
mamsa rakta tsitta gorotsana bhasu ta kim niriti gana tsatra pudza kha kha khahi khahi
māṃsa rakta citta gorocanā vasutāḥ keṃ nirti36 tana cakra pūja kha kha khāhi khāhi
If you wish to elaborate, fulfil the deities’ wishes with the ‘Spontaneous Vajra Song of Fulfilment
and Confession’. After the practitioners have enjoyed the sensual delights of the
feast-offering, dedicate the remainder offering.
Dedicating the Remainder
Place the remainder on a ‘skin from the great fields’. With the samaya-mudrā of the herukas,
spit on the substances.37 Bless the offerings with:
om akaro mukham sarva dharmanam atyan utpannotata om ah hung pé soha
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Accompanied by whistling, invite the recipients of the remainder.
hung, namdak rangshyin shyiwa lé
Hūṃ. From the natural peace of utter purity,
chomden palchen trulpa ni
The victorious Awesome Lord emanates.
tabshé da sang rolpa lé
From the play of method and insight, the secret moon,38
kyilkhor muren kyongwa nam
Arise the protectors of the maṇḍala’s perimeter.
pam pab long la tenpa sung
Accept the leftovers and protect the teachings!
cholwé trinlé drubpar dzö
Carry out the activity entrusted to you!
With this, dispatch the remainder.
Aspiration Prayer
heruka pal drongkhyer du
In the city of the Awesome Herukas,
tsok kyi khorlö chöpa yi
Through offering this gaṇacakra,
dakshyen drowa malüpa
May I and all beings, without exception,
kyilkhor chik tu drubpar shok
Attain realization in one maṇḍala!
13. The Conclusion
This has five parts: 1. Receiving the Accomplishments, 2. Confession of Mistakes, 3. Dissolution
and Re-emergence, 4. Dedication and Aspiration, and 5. Prayer of Auspiciousness.
1. Receiving the Accomplishments
First perform the offering and praise. Then:
hung, jinlab kün gyi tsawa lama ni
Hūṃ. Guru, source of all blessings,
ngödrub tsol chir palchen rolpé lha
To grant us accomplishment you manifest as the display of the Awesome Deities.
namtar go sum tuk kyi kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of awakened mind—the three doors of liberation—
rangshyin yongdrub changchub sem kyi ngö
The actual bodhicitta, the truly existent nature:
chakgya chenpo chok gi ngödrub tsol
Grant me the supreme accomplishment of Mahāmudrā:
sa chu lam nga wang chu chinang nyi
The ten grounds and five paths; the ten empowerments, outer and inner;
rigdzin shyi dang ku nga yeshe nga
The four awareness-holder levels; the five kāyas and five wisdoms;
drubchen gyé dang trinlé nampa shyi
The eight accomplishments, and the four enlightened activities.
khorwé rangshyin lobur dribpa nyi
Saṃsāra’s nature is the two adventitious stains
künshyi kham la bak la nyal gyi tsul
That lie dormant in the all-ground consciousness—
shintu namdak namkün chokden gyi
Purify them! Grant us right here, right now,
ngödrub dampa dengdir tsal du sol
The sacred accomplishment, supreme in every way!
om guru shri benza yaksha krodha tsitta hung
oṃ guru-śrī-vajra-yakṣa-krodha-citta hūṃ
dharmakaya sambhokaya nirmakaya tsitta siddhi pala hum
dharmakāya | saṃbhogakāya | nirmākāya citta siddhi phala hūṃ
2. Confession of Mistakes
By reciting the hundred-syllable mantra many times, confess your faults.
3. The Dissolution and Re-emergence
hung, nöchü lha dang shyalyé su
Hūṃ. The pure forms of the world and inhabitants
sharwa dakpé nöchü kyang
Are the appearances of the palace and deities,
ten nyi tenpa lha nam kyang
The support and supported—
tsowo la tim deyang hung
All dissolve into the main deities. They dissolve into hūṃ.
shyabkyu né zung nade bar
From the shabkyu39 up to the nāda,
rim yal dömé shi su a
Everything dissolves in stages into the original nature—āḥ.
Rest in meditative equipoise.
Arising in the yoga of daily activities:
lar yang rigpa changchub sem
Once again, in post-meditation, awareness-bodhicitta
jetob nyukmé heruka
Arises as the Heruka of the fundamental nature.
chakgya chikpé né sum du
In the form of the single mudrā, his three places
yigé tsenpé namtok sung
Are marked by syllables, giving protection from conceptuality.
benza raksha hung
vajra-rakṣa hūṃ
Thus, stabilize the practice by donning the vajra-armour
And reciting the hundred-syllable mantra.
4. Dedication and Aspiration
hung, nang drak rigpa kyilkhor sum gyi ngang
Hūṃ. With appearance, sound and awareness merging in the state of the three maṇḍalas40
sönam yeshe rim nyi naljor tsok
The practice of merit and wisdom of the two phases is perfected.41
mi né yeshe nya ngen depar ngo
I dedicate it to the nirvāṇa of non-abiding wisdom—
kün kyang palchen gopang tobpar shok
May everyone attain the level of the Awesome One!
Recite this three times.
5. Prayer of Auspiciousness
Recite the prayer of auspiciousness either from the main text or from the Vidyādhara Assembly.
Throwing flowers and playing the 'gentle cymbal'42 will make everything virtuous and excellent.

I, Jikme Drubpé Dé, the servant who delights the omniscient guru, compiled this as a convenient
text for daily use or for occasions, such as during a great accomplishment ceremony,43
when one needs to repeat the practice six times a day. I have made it brief, clear, and concise,
and closely followed the vajra words of the treasure text. Through this virtue, may
the wishes of all limitless beings be fulfilled, and may everyone reach the level of the
Awesome Heruka. Maṅgalaṃ.

| Translated by Han Kop, with the kind assistance of Tulku Dawa Zangpo, reviewed by Stefan Mang
and edited by Barry Cohen, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "dpal chen phrin las snying po/" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i
dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 16: 1–15
↑ Skt. siddhi.↑ Skt. sugata.↑ Jigme Lingpa explains in his commentary on ‘The Eight-Branch Offering
from the Tantra System Vajrakīla’ that the sugatas referred to here are the buddhas
of the past; the mighty lords are the gurus, the buddhas of the present; and sentient beings
are the buddhas of the future, since they all possess the buddha-nature or sugatagarbha.↑
Jigme Lingpa explains that one offers to the buddhas of the past in order to bring about
the actualization of their inexhaustible qualities of the body, speech, mind, qualities
and activities; one offers to the buddhas of the present in order to become a suitable vessel
for the perfect wisdom of all the tathāgatas and to attain fruition through their empowerment
and blessings; and one offers to the buddhas of the future in order to create the
auspicious circumstances for attaining the fruition of the great vehicle and fully perfecting
the benefit of others.↑ Skt. samādhi.↑ The term guna tvara is not entirely clear, but
it is most likely that tvara is a corruption of the Sanskrit word toraṇa, which is an archway
and which was translated into Tibetan with ta-bab (rta babs), referring to the place
where one would descend from one’s horse.↑ Skt. Akaniṣṭha↑ The consort of Samantabhadra is
often back-translated into Sanskrit as Samantabhadrī, but Samantabhadrā is better attested
in Sanskrit sources.↑ I,e., the causal heruka and his consort.↑ Tib. ba dzra thod phreng
rtsal↑ Some texts have hips instead of heads. སྤྱི༽Derge, Lhasa, Chatral, Dodrup, དཔྱི-
Adzom, Tsapo, Thekchok.↑ Skt. bhāṇḍa.↑ Skt. possibly ākāśamukhī, Tib. Namshalma (gnam zhal
ma).↑ I.e., Yangdak.↑ I.e. Mamo Bötong.↑ Skt. Mātṛkā, Tib. mamo.↑ I.e. Drekpa Kündul,
the chief deity of the Jikten Chötö maṇḍala, possibly called sarvaduṣṭāntaka in Sanskrit
↑ Skt. Mahākāla↑ The Mahādevas↑ The nine wisdoms are naturally arising wisdom, mirror-like
wisdom, wisdom of equality, discriminating wisdom, all-accomplishing wisdom, wisdom of
the expanse, incorrigible wisdom, wisdom of the freedom of the basic space, and wisdom free
from extremes. See Lopön Thekchok, page 433.↑ Here we have translated Kagye (bka’ brgyad)
as Eight Herukas.↑ Literally ‘the support and supported’.↑ Lama Sherab Tharchin explains
that the nine expanses of wisdoms are the nine deities.↑ Samantabhadra with consort.↑ Skt.
samādhisattva↑ This means the first syllable of the mantra, oṃ, then guru, śrī, vajra, yakṣa,
krodha, and citta, and the last syllable, hūṃ.↑ oṁ vajracaṇḍa...etc↑ oṃ guru-śrī-vajra-yakṣa-krodha-citta
hūṃ↑ Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche says that this amounts to 1,300,000. See
Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, An Illuminating Jewel: A Few Explanations that Clarify the Profound
Meaning of the Wisdom Intent of the Activity Manual for the Heart Practice of the Deities,
the Fierce Blue Gurus in the Assembly  of Awesome Ones (yi dam thugs sgrub bla ma drag
mthing dpal chen 'dus pa'i las byang gi dgongs don cung zad bshad pa zab don gsal byed
rin chen snang ba), page 302b. Lopön Thekchok says that this amounts to 1,500,000. Lopön Thekchok,
page 666.↑ Tib. smin slob. Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche takes note of this important remark
in his commentary on the practice, page 302b.↑ oṁ vajra-caṇḍa-sarva-ḍuṣtāntaka hana
daha paca hūṁ phaṭ↑ The nature-nirmāṇakāya is half-nirmāṇakāya and half-saṃbhogakāya.↑ Skt
vīra; Tib. dpa’ bo.↑ These are a type of ḍākinīs. Possibly *veginī /  *vedinī.↑ Khenpo Chemchok
mentions that ṇṛ represents the consciousness of enemies, ṭṛ the consciousness of obstructing
forces, and with jaḥ we visualize that the negative forces become indivisibly united
with the whatever support we are using.↑ DKR 307b niriti↑ It should be noted this should
only be done by a highly realized vajra master, and even they will most likely refrain
from actually doing this. When there is no realized vajra master, ambrosia is used.↑ Tulku
Dawa comments that secret moon refers to the union of the male and female deities.↑ The
shabkyu (zhabs kyu) is a Tibetan vowel sign roughly equivalent to the English vowel ‘u’.↑
The three maṇḍalas of awakened body, speech and mind. See Lopön Thekchok, pages 624-5.↑ The
two phases are the generation and completion phase.↑ Tib. sil ma.↑ Tib. Drupchen, sgrub
chen.